{title} Remarks by the President and Secretary of Commerce Bill Daley {/title}
{event} Tropical Shipping Warehouse, Palm Beach, Florida {/event}
{speaker} Bill Daley {/speaker}
{date} October 31, 1997 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you, Mr. President. Thank you, ladies and gentlemen for your patience. Even with an unbelievably bad voice, he is better than anyone else who could stand up here, so it is difficult.

I thank you also for not being cheered out, after the great victory by the Marlins and being here. I thank you for putting up with this late substitution. On Halloween, I know you're all expecting quite a treat, but instead you have gotten a trick, and I'm sorry about that. {LAUGHTER} But I think we could all sympathize with the President. And, Mr. President, I do feel your pain. {LAUGHTER}

If you'll all bear with me, the President has asked me to read his remarks that he would have given. This is a rather awkward situation for me to stand here in front of him and read his remarks. There's probably only one person in this entire audience who is truly happy that this is occurring, and that's the President's speechwriter, because this will be the first time his entire text has ever been read. {LAUGHTER} So let me begin.

"Six years ago, when I announced my candidacy for President, I said that America had a vital mission for the 21st century, and that was to keep the American Dream alive for every person responsible enough to work for it; to keep America the world's strongest force for peace, freedom and prosperity; and to bring our people together across all the lines that divide us into one America.

"We started with a new economic policy for the new economy, putting in place a bold three-part strategy to shrink the deficit, invest in our people and lower unfair trade barriers to our goods. And this strategy has succeeded: strong annual growth and low inflation, more than 13 million new jobs, the deficit down 90 percent -- even before the balanced budget law saves a single penny. America is leading the world in auto production once again, and unemployment is below five percent.

"We have made tremendous progress. But we have much more to do to prepare America for the 21st century. And Congress faces a decisive choice, whether to continue with a strategy that has helped give America the strongest economy in a generation. For one week from today, the House of Representatives will decide whether or not to keep America's exports growing with its vote on fast track. I applaud Speaker Gingrich for scheduling this vote and for his commitment to work in a bipartisan basis to enact this most important legislation this year.

"The arithmetic of the new economy is the following: We have 4 percent of the world's population and 20 percent of its income; 96 percent of the world's consumers live outside the United States, and the developing countries are growing three times as fast as the developed countries. So if we want to keep our income with our population base, we have to sell even more to the other 96 percent, especially those who are growing so rapidly.

"The workers here at Tropical Shipping know that more than anyone. And so do the workers throughout this great state of Florida. For the exports from Florida have increased over the past four years by more than 50 percent, to over $30 billion. And that's one reason why this economy in Florida has been able to create a million new jobs during that same period. And here in West Palm Beach, Boca Raton metropolitan area, exports are up over $200 million since 1993.

"But there is still much, much more to do and many barriers to those American products. So we owe it to the working men and women of America and around our entire country to level the playing field for trade so that when our workers are given a fair chance they can and they do out-compete anyone anyplace in the world."

Congress must take this opportunity -- it must not take this opportunity away from the American people to compete. For more than 20 years, as the President stated, every President, Democrat or Republican, has had this authority. If Congress grants this authority, we can use it to open trade where American firms are leading, such as computer software, medical equipment, environmental technologies. America can use it to open the markets of Chile and other Latin American countries to our goods and also our services.

We all know we must do better to raise the living standards and environmental standards throughout the world. This trade authority will give me the leverage to negotiate agreements that do exactly that.

The bills now waiting for a vote on the floor of the House and Senate offer the most detailed and concrete authority to negotiate these issues which have ever been included in this sort of legislation. And because we know that expanded world trade does not always benefit all Americans equally, we're working with members of Congress to develop new initiative to bring more Americans into this winner's circle. And with these initiatives we will increase our investment in communities that suffer from dislocation, and in those workers who lose their jobs because of trade agreement technology or any other reason.

So let's all be clear. Walking away from this opportunity will not create or save a single American job. It will not help a child in any country of the world come out of a sweatshop. It will not clean up a single toxic site in any nation. Turning away will not expand our economy, it will not enhance our competitiveness, and it will not empower our workers. It will give away markets and it will give away jobs. It will jeopardize America's preeminent role and position in this world.

Fast track is the key to U.S. leadership in the world economy, and now is not the time to raise questions about that leadership. Over the past four and a half years our three-part strategy for security and growth has worked better than anyone had imagined. We have reduced the deficit to the lowest levels since the early 1970s. We have invested in our people with historic new commitments to education and health for all Americans. And we have raised American living standards by opening new markets to quality American goods and services. And thanks to this strategy and the hard work of American people, we stand poised at the threshold of a new century, stronger than ever before.

America must not retreat on the strategy that has brought us to this place of promise. America must not return to a mind-set which is rooted in the past. Instead, America must move forward on all three crucial elements to our strategy. As you are doing here in south Florida, America must boldly seize the opportunities that stand before us into this next great century.

Thank you very much. God bless you and God bless America. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
