{title} Remarks by the President, the First Lady, the Vice President, Mrs. Gore and Dr. C. Everett Koop to Physicians and Supporters {/title}
{event} The East Room {/event}
{speaker} Charles Everett Koop {/speaker}
{date} September 20, 1993 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you very much. I know when people come to Washington, even sophisticated physicians, they like to go home having picked up some inside information. I'll let you in on a conversation that took place about two years ago when that grand old gentlemen Claude Pepper died and went directly to heaven. He had an audience with God and said, sir, just one question. Will there ever be health care reform in the United States? And the Lord answered and said, yes, Senator, there will be health care reform in the United States. That's the good news. The bad news -- not in my lifetime. {LAUGHTER}

Since I left office as your Surgeon General four years ago, I have really dedicated most of my time and energy to speaking out whenever and wherever I could all across the United States on the need for health care reform. At first mine seemed like a lonely voice out there. But now at long last, health care reform has moved to the top of the national agenda. And I thank President Clinton and the American people for placing it there.

A few weeks ago, I told the President that without passing a single law or issuing a single regulation, he had accomplished more in health care reform in the past four months than all of his living predecessors put together. {APPLAUSE} And he did that with a special kind of leadership that is willing to take on an enormous task. This kind of leadership also takes courage because it's a daunting task to face runaway health care costs, the vexing issue of universal access, the malpractice mess, the mounting problems of Medicare and Medicaid, the application of outcomes research, a sweeping reassessment of medical ethics, to say nothing of rooting out fraud and waste and abuse and greed.

Like many of our big national problems, the health care crisis in America is a very complicated one. And that means it will call for a variety of solutions. They, of course, will be national, but that means regional and local. They will have to be a publicprivate partnership. And there is a way in which every citizen must make a personal contribution.

But the President knows that there is no panacea, there is no single magic bullet, and there are no easy answers, only a series of very difficult choices. The administration's health care reform initiative is comprehensive, it's complex, it's -- well, it's complicated. And that's because it is offered in the spirit of compromise.

President Clinton has told me that he views these health care proposals not as a take it or leave it package, but as what they are -- proposals -- proposals that will lead to constructive debate and not just to constructive debate but then to constructive legislation. Some things, like universal access, are not negotiable. And that's exactly the way it should be. {APPLAUSE} But they are proposals offered in trust that an honest congressional and public debate will bring out the best in health care reform for the American people.

Now, I don't imagine that any one of us will agree with everything, every single point in the proposed reforms. I imagine the President has his own reservation about some points.

When I read the first draft of the plan, I was impressed with the attention that had been given to detail: present situations that should be eliminated, needed additions that would be made. I was supportive of the plan, even if there was specific issues with which I disagreed.

Later, I was also pleased that suggestions I made in a critique of the plan did not fall on deaf ears. Whether there are pieces of the administration's health plan that you don't like or not, we have to move forward with dialogue seeking consensus. But our reservations, or even outright objections, to some provisions cannot give us the excuse to oppose everything.

My concerns about some issues will not stop me from fighting for the many reforms the American health care system so desperately needs. And I hope you'll approach the reform proposals in exactly that same spirit. It is in this spirit of dialogue and constructive debate that I have agreed, as the First Lady said, to moderate a dialogue between the medical profession and the administration a series of panel discussions scheduled this fall and winter in a number of cities across America.

Now, these forums could, for example, combine the views and expertise of national health care figures with those of local physicians and other health care workers so they can, together, thrash out the issues of the reform proposals before the profession as they relate to a local region.

Physicians have been noticeably absent from past efforts to reform the American health care system, even when it turned out that physicians proved to be among the major beneficiaries, as with Medicare. Indeed, all too often, past health care reform measures have been imposed upon physicians, often against their loudly voiced opposition. This time, doctors cannot allow themselves to be cast in the role of naysayers.

In one way or another, doctors' decisions for their patients and themselves drive the entire health care system. And, therefore, I call upon the medical profession in which I have served for over half a century to assume its rightful position of leadership to drive the health care system to the reformed excellence that it can deliver. {APPLAUSE}

Our health care system may function with compassion, with competence, at times with sheer excellence. But not for enough Americans. For too many Americans, our health care system is a tyranny, and that means for them it is more a curse than it is a blessing. The next decade will force us to do some very hard thinking and deciding about the basic purpose of medicine. We haven't done much of that in days gone by. For most of human history, medicine really couldn't do very much, really couldn't cure anything. And so, at best, it offered some comfort, some relief of symptoms.

And, then, beginning in the 18th century -- and remember that modern medicine and the United States are about the same age -- with the application of science and technology to medicine, we saw the age when medicine could begin to cure many problems, and it could prolong the life for millions of people. And we entered the age of what we now call "our medical miracles." But a still other age may be dawning as we come to grips with the limits of curative and reparative medicine and surgery.

Today, in a strange way, hospitals and doctors -- in fact, the entire health care community -- are victims of their own success in curing disease and alleviating suffering. Increasingly, medicine decreases mortality while it increases morbidity. In other words, we have many more people living longer, but some of them are living sicker. And an increasing share of health care resources are allotted to those whom medicine cannot cure and we know about that at the start.

Too much, however, of the intensifying debate about health care focuses only on questions of how we finance it on the economic and political dimensions of health care reform. I think, for many of us, this puts the cart before the horse. More important, I think, than the economic and political pressures is the ethical imperative for health care reform.

Before we can enact the sweeping reform we need in health care, we must agree on the basic values and the ethics upon which our health care system, and, indeed, our society is based, and from which it draws its moral power.

If we could reach an ethical consensus, I think many of the economic and political problems of health care reform would fall rather easily in line. Physicians and allied health workers bring a broad field of vision to the health care reform effort. Physicians and nurses, other health care workers, have seen firsthand their fellow citizens' lack of health insurance go from being just an economic inconvenience to now being a medical risk factor.

Health workers know from experience that uninsured Americans are sicker than other patients when they finally enter the health care system, and their illnesses cost the system more to treat. And their lack of insurance results in a higher mortality rate than that of hospitalized Americans who do enjoy adequate health insurance.

Health care workers have also often seen patchwork efforts at cost control result merely in cost-shifting -- squeezing the balloon in one place, only to have it expand in another.

I would suggest that you in this room can bring your experience and expertise to the debate on health care reform so that we can preserve what is right and correct what is wrong. In so many ways, the American health care system, in spite of its many flaws, offers the best health care in the world. Nevertheless, we must remember if it ain't broke, don't fix it; but, unfortunately, an increasingly large share of our system is breaking down. So let's be sure that we turn our attention to ways that we can fix that.

And so I do call up on the medical community to approach the health care reform proposals now being offered in the spirit of our high calling in the Hippocratic tradition that requires us to do nothing but the best for our patients. Let us make sure that physicians play their part in making sure that the health care system we reform offers the very best for the American people. The President has said he wants a dialogue. Let us accommodate him in the spirit of reform and of give-and-take.

Physicians are individualists to be sure, but they are also altruists. And we have come to a time when, for once, the medical profession and the government can work together to forge a health care system for all Americans by achieving a new American consensus. Let me reaffirm that I think the plan is headed and moving in the right direction. I look forward to lending my support as I moderate the forthcoming dialogue between the great profession of medicine and this administration. Thank you. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
