{title} Summation and Closing Address of the Clinton Global Initiative {/title}
{event} New York, NY {/event}
{speaker} Chris Jennings {/speaker}
{date} September 22, 2006 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you, Mr. President. While I have worked for you, either on or off the payroll for 15 years now, I am the only rookie working group chair here at CGI. And I must tell you, it has been an extraordinarily inspiring and rewarding experience. So thank you very much.

I have to say that for all of us chairs, though, we have to recognize that we stand on the shoulders of your impressive CGI staff, the panelists, the moderators, the commitment presenters -- in my case, the incomparable Donna Shalala -- the talented volunteers, and of course, the incredible participants of this conference.

And I absolutely must publicly acknowledge, and gratefully so, my deputy, Christophe. He is an amazing talent, and he's made his own commitment of his soul, his heart, and his body to make this the most successful health inaugural -- since this is the first -- the inaugural health track a great success for you, Mr. President. So thank you, Chris. {APPLAUSE}

Mr. President, as you know, we had three sessions on neglected disease threats, infrastructure, and business' role. At the heart of our sessions were the people who are afflicted with debilitating, all too often fatal diseases, robbing the world of the talents and economic contributions they can make. And the soul of our sessions was the speakers and participants from throughout the world who passionately care about them. It quickly became clear that this story is not just about the staggering numbers of the world's citizens overwhelmed by HIV, AIDS, TB, and malaria. And it's not just the story about one billion people who are afflicted with disabling, oftentimes stigmatizing, neglected tropical diseases, such as human hookworm infection and elephantiasis. And it certainly isn't just about chronic diseases, such as heart disease, which -- get this -- has become the number one cause of death in virtually all developing countries. And strikingly, there are now more overweight than undernourished people in the world.

As compelling and concerning as all these numbers are, our panelists, whether it was the moving words of our own president, Jimmy Carter, or Tanzania's impressive new president, Jakaya Kikwete, brought home to our participants that it's all about the faces of dying children and sick mothers who haunt those who have seen them. They know that the vast majority of those who have died or have been disabled were assaulted by diseases that could have been, as you just pointed out, Mr. President, prevented or easily and cheaply treated. And they know that the tools that we need to get education, prevention, treatment, and cures are known, but simply not used well, or perhaps not at all.

What struck me, and what I think struck us all, was the point made by both Nicaraguan Minister Margarita Guardian and Iranian cardiologist Dr. Nizal Sarraf-Zadegan, that these challenges are all interconnected. How the lack of clean water, the fundamental basis of life, leads not only to the contraction of disease but also to families' ability to care for themselves and to the wellbeing of their own nation, how HIV/AIDS and malaria are worsened by neglected tropical diseases, how chronic disease is actually a communicable disease because it is spread through globalization from us throughout the developing world, and of course, how disease is intrinsically linked to poverty and economic destabilization.

And as frustrating as these realities are, the progress being made, and the potential for so much more, was a highlight again and again and again. To a large extent, we now know what works. We were continually told we no longer have any excuses for inaction. We know how to drill wells to provide clean water. But we also know that the so-called software, or education to make sure that the wells must be maintained -- we need the education to ensure, for example, that clean buckets and clean hands are there to prevent the up to three million deaths of children each year due to diarrhea and dehydration. We know that a well-structured and a community-sensitive infrastructure is the life's blood of a viable health delivery system, that it can be supported by locally trained medical paraprofessionals, delivered through creative transportation options, like motorcycles and bikes, and sustained by solar powered energy. We know that the effective administration of scarce resources is as important as having doctors and nurses, and that as Fazle Abed told us Wednesday, the next disease he'd like to see eradicated is bad management.

We know that to be viable, we have to keep it simple; a poly pill that reduces the number of doses per day, for example, or the multiple uses of the same delivery platform for all diseases. Siloing for diseases might be understandable in terms of attracting research money or funding, but it does not maximize our reach to give care. We know that we must deal with the fact that prevention must and will be the key to our ability to cope with the growing epidemic of chronic disease. And we've learned -- very inspiringly learned -- that good health can be good business, and that businesses can be, and are, great partners for change.

And best of all, Mr. President, I am pleased to report that we have already received over 60 commitments to address all these challenges throughout the world -- maybe not too bad for a rookie. But most importantly, we know that failure is no longer an option, and delay can no longer be excused. And as the Clinton Foundation's own Ira Magaziner, my friend, said, “We must move ahead and act, even while recognizing that we will make mistakes -- always knowing, though, that if we take advantage of the skills, knowledge, and motivations of local communities, we will always do better than doing nothing at all.”

Mr. President, over 20 years ago, a terrible failure to expand our own horizons occurred, the explosion of the Challenger space shuttle. CGI participant and a close friend of yours, and the first public servant that I had the pleasure to serve, John Glenn, called a small gathering of his staff into his room, and he told us, with tears in his eyes -- unfortunately, like the tears in my eyes -- to never turn away from the opportunity, the privilege, to do something bigger than yourself, no matter the risk. Nothing could be a better message to and for this inspiring get-together. By words, and particularly by deeds, Mr. President, you and so many of those in the audience today have heeded this call and will inspire others to eliminate barriers for every child of God to achieve their greatest potential. Thank you so very much. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
