{title} Remarks at African American History Month Celebration {/title}
{event} Dean Acheson Auditorium, Washington, DC {/event}
{speaker} Dorothy Height {/speaker}
{date} February 18, 2005 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. I cannot begin my remarks without saying how wonderful it is to be here with the Secretary of State and how proud I feel of being an African American woman as I have followed her these last days and have seen her as she has moved from place to place. And I just have to say to you, you make us very, very proud. {APPLAUSE}

Carter Woodson, in establishing Black History Month, said we have to fill in those missing pages of our history, and he laid the groundwork for doing that. Our comedian Dick Gregory often says that we are shortchanged and we even shortchanged ourselves in selecting the month because we took the month with the fewest days. {LAUGHTER}

But Dr. Woodson was very clear: he was honoring the month of Abraham Lincoln and the month in which not Valentine's Day but it was Frederick Douglass' birthday. And it was Frederick Douglass who said that in the struggle for equality and justice your only reward may be in the opportunity to stay in the struggle. And I feel that I have been blessed with the opportunity to work with so many people, and as I've come to this I look back and say that it was encouraging to me to know that we will be having soon an African American Museum on the Mall in Washington. The President announced that the other day. {APPLAUSE}

I grew up in a small Pennsylvania town where all of my neighbors and friends and schoolmates were predominantly from Eastern Europe. In fact, it was an outpost for the foreign-born and there were very few African Americans living in that community. And every time we came to our history classes, I hated history just -- I just hated the history class. Though I was a good student, I hated to go to the class because they would talk only about slavery, and slavery then, as it was described, was something that made me feel demeaned. And in the midst of all these white classmates, it was most of us as black students, we would withdraw.

But I think that's the good thing about having a museum is that we will look back and realize what slavery was and how it is that those who were enslaved contributed to the development of our country and you'll have a different perspective on it, and that it will give us an opportunity to start with our own story because of African Americans. Most of us do not know our own history because we have not had a chance to learn it in a systemized way.

In these days, it's very important for us to begin to see how we get to know one another. I was interested that the Association for the Center of African American Life and History made the theme for this month the Niagara Movement. The Niagara Movement was a movement, was really the first protest movement in the black community. But it cannot stand alone because it has to be shown that during slavery there was the abolitionist movement of black and white people who worked against slavery, and that all the way through that whole movement there was that kind of an effort.

But in the Niagara Movement in 1905, they declared, "We claim for ourselves every single right that belongs to a freeborn American, whether it's political, civil or social; and until we get these rights we will never cease to protest and assail the ears of America." And that was a major protest movement. And many of you will recall it was at a time when Booker T. Washington felt that one kind of education was needed and that black people needed to be gentle in their approach. And then there was Dr. W.E.B. DuBois, who came forward, and he said we need a more aggressive approach and preferred five years. {COMMENT="Inaudible"} 

Even in their initial meeting it's very significant they call it the Niagara Movement because they tried to reach Niagara Falls in the United States and there was no hotel that would take them. So they moved the meeting to Niagara Falls in Canada and they soon called it the Niagara Movement.

I think, as we look back, we have to realize -- and I have been acting with the NAACP and other organizations -- that the Niagara Movement laid the base for the development of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. It also stirred more -- and one of the things that always intrigues me when I look back over the slave period and that period that followed, I wonder how it was that those who were freed slaves with very little were able to build insurance companies or able to build businesses and were able to say they made things happen for themselves, and they did it with dignity. I always remember Madam C.J. Walker, a woman who became a millionaire. Someone asked her, well, how did you get started? And she said, I got started by giving myself a start. That's how I got started. And that was the kind of spirit of those times. And Ida B. Wells, who was thrown off the train because she had anti-lynching literature with her.

In my youth, I was very active, beginning with my high school days. I entered a contest on the Constitution of the United States -- it was sponsored by the Elks. I won the contest. My mother said to me when I came home from Chicago, where there were more people in the auditorium than lived in the town of Rankin where I lived, and she said, Dorothy, I have to tell you your speech sounded much better in the armory than it did in the kitchen. {LAUGHTER} But what she didn't realize, and neither I at the time, that it was in the kitchen that she gave me the courage to go to the armory.

But I think the thing that I think of now is that I chose the 13th, 14th and 15th Amendments, and I'm still working on the 14th amendment, to make justice and the law a reality. And out of all of this you could see that the Civil Rights movement had a long rootage that had begun. {COMMENT="Inaudible"} we had to think about this, the idea of protests, the building that the National Council for Negro Women has just moved in and bought on Pennsylvania Avenue, was the seat of the largest -- of the Pearl incident, which was the largest uprising during slavery where 77 slaves, including two girls, 12 and 15, tried to get away, but the winds didn't go with them and they were brought back in chains to 7th and Pennsylvania Avenue.

You get the sense, as Oppenheimer wrote after seeing the monuments in Lincoln Park, he said if you look at the slave in this monument at the knee of Abraham Lincoln, you will realize that Abraham Lincoln didn't free the slaves, the slaves freed themselves, that they fought, that there was a … {APPLAUSE}

But I often say to young people, those people you think of as slaves were not slaves in Africa. They were kings and queens and inventors and educators. They were made slaves. And I think that we often forget that as we go along.

The Civil Rights Movement -- I played -- I was the female member in the Civil Rights team called United Civil Rights Leadership with Dr. King and Whitney Young and Roy Wilkins, and you know Philip Randolph and you know the rest. And I have to say to Dr. LaFayette, little did we think when we had the most on a day that Medgar Evers was assassinated, Steven Perry of the {COMMENT="Inaudible"} Fund called the group together and he said we have to do something. And Roy Wilkins had to leave early to go to the funeral and in a discussion each of us talked about what was up. I could tell about the atrocities, literally atrocities, happening with our girls in the hands of law enforcement officers. {COMMENT="Inaudible"} But on that day, the first real money ever raised for Civil Rights, that day in 1963, June, on that day the National Council of Negro Women, through its educational foundation, became the agency through which we could send 114 of those young people who had interrupted their education.

And I think too little is known about the way in which youth played such a strong part in the Civil Rights Movement. And to sit here today and to hear him, it's a real pleasure for me and I just want to thank him for what he contributed. {APPLAUSE} Because the Student Nonviolent Committee was not about hot dogs and coca-colas and Woolworth's; it was about dignity. And I think that that struggle for dignity means a lot to women especially because even through all the period of segregation the Civil Rights Movement was able to change and eliminate – they were such great indignities to people, and I think we do not realize that over and above the things like transportation, just plain indignities, for example: Mary McLeod Bethune, who founded the National Council of Negro Women, said as a black woman she was traveling on a train and at that time they would not address a woman of color with any name, they would never call her Miss or Mrs. They would call her Doctor or anything else but Miss or Mrs. And she said a conductor looked at her and he said, "Auntie, may I have your ticket?" And she said, "I looked into this man's blue eyes and I said to him, "Tell me, which of my sisters' sons are you?" {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} 

I think that I learned and relearned working in the Civil Rights Movement, that we had to be conscious at every level. Black History Month has great value because it makes us stop and think of who we are and of our contributions, and to recognize that contribution, and to see that we have made a contribution. But I also learned through the Civil Rights Movement that all of our organizations had different programs and we used different tactics and different strategies, but that unity did not mean uniformity and that we all had to learn to work together, and that was very important.

And as I look at this year at where we are in the world today, in a world where two-thirds of the people of the world are colored, I really think that the contribution that we could make and are making has to be understood. But it begins with knowing who you are and knowing your own history, and to say that this is – we are part of a new generation. The new generation has to build on the last.

We need each other in this moment of history. We are different. We have many differences. But I think as we have learned about unity, so we must learn to appreciate differences, and I think that's one of the contributions that Black History Month challenges us to do, to appreciate differences.

Dr. King always said, "The black man needs the white man to free him of his fear, and the white man needs the black man to free him of his guilt." We need each other, and that we need to work together. And if we do so, and use the kind of vigor -- I think we need new vigor in our whole effort, new strength, new determination. We need some of the old spirit that was there when we sang, "We Shall Overcome." But we also need to do it with full respect for people of every race and color, and we need to work together, realizing that we can have a world in which we have peace and justice and freedom and dignity for every person, as we work at it with the inspiration of Black History Month and with the quality of spirit that we get in our new leadership in the Secretary of State.

Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
