{title} Speech to European Parliament {/title}
{event} European Parliament, Strasbourg {/event}
{speaker} Enrique Barón Crespo {/speaker}
{date} December 9, 1986 {/date}
{source} http://www.margaretthatcher.org/speeches/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, first I would like to say, on behalf of the Socialist Group, that we deplore the incident that occurred at the start of this session. Parliamentary rules must be scrupulously observed; the Socialists are committed to that.

Madam President-in-Office of the European Council, the results of the London Summit were eagerly awaited by my group. We were expecting a firm response from the European Council to the problems currently facing the Community, which would help map out its long-term future at a time when new perspectives are opening up. We expected leadership from the Summit; leadership needed to respond to such urgent matters as the budget, agriculture, socio-economic cohesion, the implementation of the Single Act and the confirmation of Mr Delors as President of the European Commission. And we also expected to see international problems defined.

So it is not surprising that our anticipation turned into disappointment. The Summit's one definite decision was to confirm Mr Delors as President. On behalf of my group may I warmly congratulate him and assure him and his colleagues of our best wishes for the tour about to start. I hope it will not be an Odyssey, because you have not even given him the money to travel round the capitals of the Member States. On behalf of my group, I ally myself with what the President of the Commission said about Parliament because I believe that what is needed here is mediation and initiative, not begging.

The lack of top-level decisions—I am quoting the Financial Times—and the evasion of such fundamental questions as relations between Europe and the United States, casts serious doubt on the success of the Summit.

On 28 November last the President-in-Office of the Council met with about 40 British Conservative Members and promised to renew the fight for reform of the CAP at the Summit. Mrs Thatcher's total unanimity with the views of the Members, who proposed radical measures, was actually announced by my honourable colleague, Sir Henry Plumb himself.

What circumstances caused you to go back on that commitment? How can Members of Parliament vote for the 1987 budget when we know there will be a deficit of over 4 000 million ECU and the Commission has already been asked to prepare a supplementary budget for the spring? Will our resources continue to be frozen? Are the Fontainebleau mechanisms being reviewed?

Apparently the price of avoiding controversy at the Summit was an ‘ostrich policy'. It is alleged that lack of adequate preparation was the cause. Perhaps that is true. But Parliament had completed its work. Its task was done.

During the October part-session Parliament approved two reports. One, presented by my fellow group member, Mrs Hoff, was on policy for surpluses, proposing emergency measures. I had the honour of defending the other, on future financing, which demonstrated the need to rely on our own resources, to achieve a thorough reform of agricultural policy and to create a special fund for liquidating the surpluses.

At the first reading of the 1987 Budget, Parliament pointed out the practical consequences of both reports in serious amendments. On the same lines, the Committee on the Budget, meeting on 3 December, stressed the urgency of a decision on the matter to the Council. The only response from the Summit has been to put back these burning issues to a later date. The Committee's excellent comments and suggestions are not being converted into reality by the Community.

These delaying tactics are irresponsible. Parliament has to vote on a 1987 budget which includes excessive agricultural costs without even an indication from the Council about how the necessary funds can be provided. This means that the uncontainable pressure of agricultural costs will continue to push structural costs to one side and displace development aid.

Meanwhile, the debate on economic and social cohesion, the key to the survival of the Community, has also been postponed. This is difficult for someone like me from a new Member State to understand. How can European union advance if the means of achieving unity are denied and what increases differences is encouraged. At least in one respect the destruction has been recognized.

In its statement, the Summit recognizes that progress towards the reduction of unemployment and the convergence of standards of living has been less than satisfactory. However, apart from the usual tired litany of prescriptions, no serious measures at Community level have been added. Some Member States have rightly defended a strategy of economic growth which includes an increase in public spending as a means of creating employment. These are not only States with Socialist governments.

My group identifies with such positions as those expressed by the Christian Democrat Prime Ministers of the Benelux countries who have laid down a common strategy for reinforcing the three specific points defended by the Brussels Commission. First, the transformation of the Community into a large internal market does not just mean making it a free trade area; complementary and parallel measures for economic and social cohesion must be set in motion. Similarly, the employment problem will not be solved by simple liberalization of the labour market, but both the social dialogue and the strategy of cooperation approved by all the representatives of European industry must be maintained. In this connection it should be pointed out that the Council's decision to encourage cooperation between the representatives of industry was seen to be belied by the President-in-Office of the Council's unprecedented refusal to meet with European Trade Unionists before the summer Summit. {APPLAUSE} 

We agree that research and technology are crucial to the creation of employment and we therefore welcome the Council's statement in this respect. However, if the Presidency, together with France and the Federal Republic of Germany, will only commit 3 000 million ECU to this project when it already costs 5 500 million ECU to maintain programmes in progress—like RACE, Esprit and Brite—one may be permitted to doubt the sincerity of such intentions. What about the Erasmus programme? In my opinion it is the best example of pragmatic, practical action that exists in the Community, precisely because it is aimed at the young Europeans who will create tomorrow's Europe. {APPLAUSE}

As a consequence of the position the Council has adopted, this programme is an empty agreement, because its funding has been blocked.

The difference between desire and reality is apparent in yet another area. To our surprise, the Council spoke of real progress in the protection of the environment, thanks to Community action. Such optimism could only be understood if the catastrophes of Chernobyl and the Rhine had not been mentioned at the Summit. It is essential that the Community establish contingency plans and programmes to produce effective joint action.

My group welcomes the statements on the fight against terrorism, drugs, cancer and AIDS. Parliament has repeatedly expressed itself on the need for cooperation on these issues, and also on the urgent need to provide real funds for dealing with them.

As regards foreign policy, Mr President, we approve the Council's statement on Afghanistan, but at the same time we are concerned about the total absence of any reference to the other political problems on the international scene. It is as if the Council had suffered a sudden amnesia about such urgent matters as the situation in Central America, the Middle East or South Africa, not to mention the question of the Malvinas. {APPLAUSE} 

The European Community must act as a real protagonist on the world scene, not using the military might at its disposal but acting on the basis of its own economic power and also as an independent mediator between the two superpowers. This is what we did at Helsinki, this is what we did in Madrid, and this is what is going on in Vienna. But to be effective and credible, Europe must be able to speak with one voice, based on internal cohesion and economic power, and if I may be permitted to say so as a citizen of a country which is now a full member of the Community, a country which was not liberated from the bonds of fascism by any allied forces, I believe that the time has come to reinforce the existence of a two-pillar Atlantic Alliance. Europeans cannot accept that there should be a single great pillar which is just given support and operational bases. I do not think this is good either for the United States or for Europe. {APPLAUSE} 

This was made very clear at the Reykjavik meeting, which showed Europeans that if we cannot put our own house in order the two superpowers will decide our future without consulting us. So it is very regrettable that there was not a clearer message from the Summit on such crucial issues.

To sum up, Mr President, the London Summit was a complete failure. It produced the longest communiqué so far, but with the least content. On the eve of implementation of the Single Act the Council did not even mention such vital issues as majority voting or the Commission's executive powers. There appears to have been no progress on any of the outstanding problems such as the budget, finance—including the need to review the Fontainebleau Agreement and the reform of the structural funds—, employment, the environment and the political role of the Community in the world.

The Socialist Group and the European Parliament remain prepared to act in accordance with the European vision and to look towards the future. However, an intergovernmental Europe, conceived as a kind of Conservative ‘Holy Alliance' has no credibility. What the Community needs is leadership, because Europe is a project founded on convictions and mutual interests, not just a souk where dealers haggle.

Madam President of the European Council, in 1979 in Dublin you showed that your attitude to Europe consisted of asking for your money back. In 1985 in Milan you were against the Conference which resulted in the European Single Act. Let us hope that if—as is far from desirable—you are again chosen by fate and the British people to speak as President of the Council you will have finally been converted to the cause of Europe. But for the moment, as far as the Socialist Group is concerned, I have to say that the London Summit has clearly demonstrated how lacking this leadership—which Europe badly needs—has been for the last six months, and therefore we cannot approve this report by the President of the Council.

{SUSTAINED APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
