{title} Speech to European Parliament {/title}
{event} European Parliament, Strasbourg {/event}
{speaker} Giovanni Cervetti {/speaker}
{date} December 9, 1986 {/date}
{source} http://www.margaretthatcher.org/speeches/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Like Mr Barón, Mr President, I too think that the incident that occurred in this Chamber deserves censure, all the more so since what we need here is serious, detailed debates and not the low outbursts of the agitators. {APPLAUSE}

Having said this, I will come to the substance of my speech.

In the, now, protracted history of the ‘European Summits' it is difficult to find a more inconsistent, fruitless and useless Summit than the one that we are discussing. That is why the emphatic way in which you, Madam President-in-Office-of-the-Council, have praised the results is so astonishing. What results are there to speak of? ‘When European Heads of State meet they should be able to raise their sights and produce ideas which will help to shape the future of the Community. That was the original idea behind the European Council. It is not being upheld'. These are not my words. As you well know, Prime Minister, they are the words of an authoritative newspaper in your country—the Financial Times. For my part I can add that on problems of more immediate concern also, there was a general lack of success. I do not know if that was what President Delors was referring to when he said that the grounds for satisfaction are pretty slim. However that may be, in my opinion there is comfort to be found in another pronouncement of the London economic daily, which says: ‘No attempt was made by the participants to deal with the two major problems looming on the immediate horizon, those of Community financing, and agricultural reform. Mr Penders also pointed it out, albeit in a contradictory speech. Even a research programme for 7 700 million ECU, proposed by the Commission, was not approved and, on the contrary, was referred back to the attention of the Ministers. And then, let no one say that agreement was reached on the decisive question of employment. We are glad that the document that the British government had prepared on the basis of its own conception of flexibility and, in practice, deregulation, was rejected. The compromise that was reached, which indeed draws attention to the need for dialogue between both sides of industry, cannot in any way be considered satisfactory, because it is couched only in general terms and seems to be an abdication vis-à-vis the fundamental question of growth and work.

What remains, therefore, of the London meeting? It has been called, ironically, the AIDS Summit. We are in no way disposed to go along with that irony, because AIDS is a worrying phenomenon and calls for commitment. However, it is equally well unacceptable for all the propaganda praising the success of the meeting to centre on that question. Moreover, taking up a Summit's time with questions regarding certain financial services, or public tenders, or professional qualifications—with all due respect for these questions, on which, anyway, the decisions appear unsatisfactory—does not seem anything to shout about.

And here we should make a fuller comment regarding not only the London meeting but also the British Presidency of the Council. We shall go into this in greater detail tomorrow. For now, however, may I be allowed to recall that, at the start of the six months' period of office the British talked insistently of getting away from the so-called pro-European Utopias, that were denied, and getting down to much-acclaimed concrete achievements. Well, it would have been easy enough then to prophesy that, on such a basis, little indeed could be achieved: today, we can state with certainty that even pragmatism has given us virtually nothing.

But let us get back to London, where failure is even more obvious on the question of both international policy and political cooperation. Here, Prime Minister, solemn statements on Afghanistan are not sufficient, and, on the other hand, the Commissions are significant. Let us come to the essential point—‘after Reykjavik' and East-West relations. We all know the facts. The document from the British Presidency, that they wanted to have signed at the last moment, was rejected. In view of its content we are glad it was, and, without beating about the bush, we applaud those who were responsible for its rejection. That spotlights, however, the inconsistency or the absence of Europe—which is something that does not gladden us at all. Let it not be thought, however, that that inconsistency is mainly due to objective divisions that have indeed become apparent. No, the inconsistency is caused by a wrong approach, which you support. It is the approach that denies to Europe—whilst respecting alliances, remember—an initiative of its own for promoting and bringing about détente, disarmament, security and peace. And this causes us grave concern. We do not wish to ask indiscreet questions, but the rumours circulating around the ‘fireside' discussions in London, and other rumours as well, cannot leave us in a peaceful state of mind.

We need to change direction. You delude yourselves if you think that the Europe of today is the same as the Europe of the past. Many things, not all of them for the best, have happened in recent years. Look at your difficulties and failures in supporting the policy followed for South Africa or the Middle East.

We know that it is hard work affirming new, innovatory, positive, progressive positions and policies. But today Europe and its unity, its freedom and democracy, its development, its employment, its research, its security and its peace are synonymous. We shall fight for these values and, together with other democratic parties of the Left, we shall make them prevail over any conservative tendency. By effectively uniting progressive, pro-European ideals and achievements we shall make them victorious for Europe, for both its present and its future.

{APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
