{title} Remarks at a Presidential Campaign Rally for George Bush in Los Angeles, California {/title}
{event} Los Angeles Ballroom, Century Plaza Hotel {/event}
{speaker} George H. W. Bush {/speaker}
{date} August 24, 1988 {/date}
{source} http://www.reagan.utexas.edu/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

What a crowd! What a wonderful, enthusiastic crowd! For a minute, I thought we'd come to the welcoming ceremony for Wayne Gretzky. {LAUGHTER} This is fantastic. I want to thank the Governor, the good Duke -- thank him for that introduction -- to urge, with all my heart, the overwhelming reelection of Pete Wilson. That's going to benefit all of us on the ticket.

And what a glittering array of stars, each and every one of you. I thank you. And Bob -- those kind words about my dad -- thank you very much for that. But we're delighted to be here, Barbara and I. There's a danger -- you have President Reagan, Governor Deukmejian, and George Bush. Watch out -- overdose of charisma. That's not too good. {LAUGHTER}

So -- but Mr. President, I was listening to your wonderful speech at the convention, and all I can say is, I am grateful for those most supportive words. And, yes, we are going to go out and "Win one for the Gipper!" And November -- that's the one it's going to be. And California is absolutely essential, so Barbara and I will be here. My running mate and his wife, Marilyn, will be here. And we are not going to overlook any single area in this all-important State. I came to ask for your help; with it, I am convinced we can win in November. There is a profound difference between me and my opponent in this election, a difference not only of policies but really of fundamental values. And I believe the two most important issues facing our country are jobs and peace. And that's what I will focus on if elected President, and that's what this election is all about -- jobs and peace.

In the last 6 years, we've created 17 million new jobs. Ninety percent of them are full-time. The majority are in higher paying categories. And we're not creating just good jobs and good wages; we're creating better jobs at better wages, and we intend to keep right on doing it. The President met with some of us earlier, and he reminded me that more Americans are at work today than ever before in the history of this country and a greater percentage of the work force is at work than any time in the history of this country. And they're making more money. And they're keeping more of it in their own pockets, where it belongs. And instead of spending it and sending it in to Uncle Sam -- I mean on April 15th -- we are going to keep those tax rates down and hold the line on taxes.

The Democrats, probably with that old Carter-Mondale misery index in mind, are running all around the country talking about this swiss-cheese economy. And as I said in New Orleans, that may be how it looks to the three blind mice, but that's not how it looks to the American people. And when they were in charge, it was all holes and no cheese at all. And now we're on the move.

And so, I have a program to build on what the Reagan-Bush administration has done: Start with urban and rural enterprise zones; cut the capital gains tax rate to help small businesses get started; keep Congress from regulating business to death; and slash the deficit with a flexible freeze on spending and a line-item veto for the President. There's a good five-point program for you.

All we have to do is keep the economy growing at the same rate and guarantee that everyone who wants a job has a job. But we'll never get it done if we return to those discredited policies of tax and spend. And as Governor, my opponent increased taxes so fast that his State was named "Taxachusetts." You've seen the bumper stickers. {LAUGHTER} And if he had -- this is a fact -- if he had increased Federal taxes at the same rate that he's done in Massachusetts, the average American family would be paying $2,300 more this year in income taxes alone.

{BOOING} 

We cannot afford that philosophy in the White House. And our opponents are trying to give America the same old line: the unemployment line. {LAUGHTER} But, of course, if I'm going to be really fair about it, I have to admit that the Governor has created one new job. He has a third man on their ticket and -- --

{AUDIENCE} Yes! {/AUDIENCE} 

But let me just repeat what I said on taxes. I promise you, if Congress tries to raise the taxes when I'm President -- and you know they will -- I'll say no. And if they try again, I'll stare them right in the eye and say, Read my lips: No new taxes! To the millions of Americans taking out a loan on that new car or a mortgage on their first house, I'm going to say we've cut inflation from double digits to 4 percent. And we've cut those interest rates in half. And I'm not going to let them take it away from you. And to the leaders of this expansion -- the women who helped create the new jobs and filled two out of every three of them -- I say you know better than anyone that equality begins with economic empowerment. You're gaining economic power, and I'm not going to let them take that away from you either. And to the older Americans, we're going to keep that Social Security Trust Fund sound. And we're not going to let them take that security away from the older Americans in this country either.

I am worried about foreign affairs and the national security of this country. I'm concerned about my opponent's approach to national security matters. If there's one thing that our President has proved beyond all doubt, it is that weakness and ambivalence tempt aggressors to start wars, and strength and clarity deter aggression and preserve the peace. And we've had a bipartisan consensus on this: Roosevelt, Truman, Dwight Eisenhower, John Kennedy, President Ronald Reagan -- all of them understood this, formed a basis for our bipartisan consensus on foreign policy that has kept the peace for 40 years. And I think it is fair to ask whether my opponent understands that. And his policies place him far outside the bipartisan consensus, far out on the liberal leftwing. And that's where he is on these security issues.

Let me give you an example. He was the only Governor -- many were approached -- he was the only one to oppose and prevent construction of the groundwave emergency network in his State, a vital communications link, vital to our national deterrent and to the security of the United States of America. And he was the only one that opposed it. And thanks, I'd rather keep this -- --

{BOOING} 

I'd rather keep this country prepared. And so, we're going to have a debate on these fundamental, factual issues. When it comes to the land-based part of our triad, it's three positions -- no new MX, no midgetman, no flight testing of new missiles -- that add up to no modernization. And in this troubled world we're in, no modernization amounts to unilateral cuts. And so I ask: Is he discarding the mainstream, strategic doctrine of Democratic and Republican Presidents alike for 30 years? Is he saying we don't need it? And I want to know, and I believe the American people have a right to know, how we're approaching these defense matters. I will make you this pledge: I will keep our forces modern, and I will keep them strong. And I will keep America secure and at peace.

My opponent has called a SDI a fantasy. Let me tell you something. The appalling danger of nuclear missiles is no fantasy: It is a nightmare. And he would leave America totally defenseless against missiles, and I will not. I will go forward with the Strategic Defense Initiative and make a safer world for our children. No, I really believe that when it comes to our vital foreign policy and our national defense and, yes, our national intelligence, we cannot take another gamble. The American people gambled once on a moderate-sounding, liberal Governor making vague promises and then avoiding the issues, and we cannot make that mistake a decade later. We must have tough, experienced leadership and someone who's been there and someone you can trust. And I am that man. A lot of the campaign -- --

{AUDIENCE} We want Bush! We want Bush! We want Bush! {/AUDIENCE} 

Today we're entering into a new era in American history: an era of growth and opportunity, an era -- we're strong and hopes are high. But the foundation of our pride -- the people's pride -- is values, old-fashioned American values like family and faith, patriotism, persistence, and really a belief in freedom.

And I just have to insert something here. Yesterday, my opponent came out swinging, and of all things -- the Pledge of Allegiance. And what is it about the Pledge of Allegiance that upsets him so much? The Democratic legislature -- now, listen to these facts -- the Democratic legislature in Massachusetts supports it. Ten years ago, they required teachers to lead the pledge, and that remains the law in Massachusetts today because the legislature overrode my opponent's veto by an overwhelming vote. I would have signed that bill. Any constitutional question that someone might raise should be decided by the Supreme Court of the United States. And Governor Jim Thompson, who faced a similar choice, made the right choice: signed the same bill, and now it's law in Illinois.

And let's face it, my opponent was looking for a reason not to sign that bill. I would have looked for a reason to sign that legislation. It is very hard for me to imagine that the Founding Fathers -- Samuel Adams and John Adams and John Hancock -- would have objected to teachers leading students in the Pledge of Allegiance to the flag of the United States. I just don't believe that was their concept when they wrote the Constitution of our great country.

Now, I've served with a great President, and this is no time to go in the opposite direction. This is the time to build on what we have done and to take this country forward. This is the time to offer hope to every American. Some haven't benefited by this, the longest recovery in history, but if we stay the course and keep this country moving ahead, everyone will benefit.

And let me be very, very clear about one last point. I have been very proud, very proud indeed, to serve as Vice President for President Ronald Reagan. And now it is my high honor to once again introduce him to you, his friends and strong supporters -- ladies and gentlemen, the President of the United States.

{AUDIENCE} Four more years! Four more years! Four more years! {/AUDIENCE} 

{/speech}
