{title} Remarks to Reagan Administration Political Appointees {/title}
{event} Room 450, Old Executive Office Building {/event}
{speaker} George H. W. Bush {/speaker}
{date} August 12, 1988 {/date}
{source} http://www.reagan.utexas.edu/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Let me salute our able Chief of Staff -- the President's -- who is here and who has spoken. And you know the way Ken Duberstein came into this thing and took over, and he's doing an outstanding job. I'm delighted to be sharing this podium with him. I want to pay my respects to the members of the President's Cabinet and to all of you.

I won't speak too long here today. I don't want to be like the speaker at the Democratic Convention who gave the nominating speech. The Washington Post reported that one delegate at that convention hit another one with his sign during that speech. Just before the guy that was hit passed out, he said, "Hit me again; I can still hear him." {LAUGHTER} So, I don't want to do that.

But I am happy to have this chance to speak to the senior appointees of this administration, including many in the President's Cabinet -- the field commanders, if you will, of the Reagan revolution. And more than most other Americans, you have a special understanding of the importance of the election that lies ahead. For the last 7\1/2\ years we've worked with the President to build a better America, and we've done just exactly that. To create literally a sea change in American Government and politics. And now, frankly, I am counting on you to help determine whether that change continues, whether it gets even better, whether we can build on the successes of this administration or whether the direction changes, whether it's totally reversed. And that is exactly what's at stake in the coming election.

Things are still moving forward. The revolution that you all helped engineer is getting better all the time, domestically and in foreign policy as well. Four years ago, the Mondale Democrats said -- and we all remember it, all of us who were here 4 years ago -- said that this economic expansion was fleeting, that disaster was around the corner. There was predictions over and over again that the young recovery then couldn't possibly continue. And here we are, 68 months into the greatest explosion of job growth in American history, and we're still going strong.

You know, we all know what will kill -- definitively kill -- this economic expansion that we've worked so hard to create, and that's the policies of those same Democrats I referred to -- the McGovern or Carter or Mondale Democrats, who were just itching to get back into the game, get their hands back on the levers that you now operate so ably. Given the chance, I am convinced that they would repeal the tax cuts that we've worked so hard to enact and defend, and that would defeat and simply bury this recovery.

You see, economic expansions don't die of old age; they die because of bad policies. And that's what this election -- really the critical thing that this election is all about. And I will readily concede that all the good things you've accomplished are not in focus in the minds of the electorate. Part of our job at our convention, and part of my job as the standard-bearer, and hopefully your job as surrogates, will be to get these good things in focus. Elections are normally determined by the state of the economy, and the state of the economy is A - 1.

I'm sure you've noticed that our opponents, at the convention at least, and certainly afterward, don't seem to want to talk about policy at all. They've declared that this election is about competence, not ideology -- as if good ideas and good execution were somehow inconsistent. As you've proven in these last 8 years, that simply isn't so. In the last 8 years, we've had some fantastic ideas: reducing tax rates so America could grow, cutting the interest rates so families could afford a home. You know, there's a lot of young people out there that don't remember that 10 days before the President and I were sworn in the prime rate of interest was 21\1/2\ percent. Fighting inflation so that a family could buy more with the dollar that they worked so hard to earn. And building a strong and secure America so that we would be in a position through that strength to negotiate reductions in nuclear arms and indeed to eliminate -- in the face of the skeptics -- eliminate an entire generation of nuclear weapons. Reforming the tax code to close off loopholes and open up opportunity. And aiding the cause of freedom around the world in order to give peace a chance.

I've been to a lot of different countries as Vice President, and I am absolutely convinced that it is only the United States of America that is steady enough and convinced enough and strong enough to offer the hope of freedom and democracies to those who would like to have it.

Did we come up with these ideas then to help one group over another? No. Did we embrace the ideas because we were out of touch with the concerns of real Americans? No. Just the opposite, as a matter of fact. We took hold of these ideas and put them into action because they work. They produce the greatest good for the greatest number of Americans.

Measure us by our performance. In the last 6 years, more than 17 million new jobs have been created -- good jobs, at good wages. And last year, three out of four jobs that were created were in the higher paying categories, where the average salary was $26,000. Only 2 percent were low-paying service jobs.

And measure us by our performance. Real family income is growing after it had fallen under the Democrats. The average American family, the one that's right in the middle, is now earning $5,000 a year more than it would be under the Democratic policies.

Measure us by our performance. Peace is breaking out all over the world. Earlier this week, on the same day, the headlines announced not one, but two cease-fires in very troubled areas of the world: one between Iran and Iraq and one between Angola, Cuba, and South Africa.

Our policies are working, and I want to build on those policies. With performance like that, it's no wonder that my opponent would have us believe that he supported these Republican policies all along. The other day, I referred to him, only semi-in jest, as the Stealth candidate -- {LAUGHTER} -- because no matter how much he jetted around the country, from place to place, no issues seemed to crop up on that radar screen.

We have a two-part mission in this election: to remind the American people what we've done, what we've accomplished, and then to convince them, given a chance, that there's going to be change as we move into a new decade, but that we can do even better. We must remind them that peace and economic growth are not blanketing our land by accident; they've not fallen out of the sky. But rather, they've grown from carefully cultivated seeds planted by the men and women in this room. And now the task is to plant where no flowers have bloomed before, to grow to heights previously unimagined. And we've got to keep this recovery going until every man and woman in this country benefit from this recovery.

And I have been very specific in offering new proposals for extending the Reagan revolution into the Bush era. I've proposed a cut in the capital gains rate to create new jobs by spurring the start of new business. It worked in 1978. It will work again now. It will raise revenues for the Federal Government, and I am convinced it will help people by creating more jobs.

I've proposed to slam the door on the deficit by using what I call a flexible freeze to rein in Federal spending and yet give the President some flexibility in how to allocate resources. And I'm asking the American people to instruct the Congress to give the President what 43 Governors have, and that's that line-item veto. It's time now, the Congress having failed, to give the executive branch a chance to do better in controlling spending.

And I've proposed a comprehensive child care plan for America's families, one which doesn't rely on the heavy and all-intrusive hand of government, but on free choice for parents. One which doesn't discriminate against families whose children are cared for by the neighbors or relatives or church centers or by the parents themselves at home, but preserves that diversity that makes our country so unique.

I've proposed merit schools and magnet schools to reward and encourage excellence in education. And I've proposed expanding educational assistance from Head Start for preschoolers to college savings bonds for college students. Education is the answer to our competitiveness. Education is the answer that will bring hope to those kids who really haven't had hope and opportunity before.

I've laid out a wide-ranging plan for cleaning up the environment and a comprehensive plan for reducing America's dependence on foreign oil. And I've spelled out in detail my vision of the steps we've got to take to see that we remain free and secure in the 1990's. In every one of these areas I've been specific for a very clear reason: Because the American people have a right to know where the candidates stand. And I believe if they do they will choose to continue and to improve on the work that you have so ably begun.

Leo Burnett, one of the finest advertising executives of all time, used to have a ten commandments on the art of plain talk. And one of his commandments was forget about image and concentrate on substance. Project what you are, not what you would like others to think that you are. And I take this commandment to heart. If we state in plain terms the case for low taxes and high opportunity, for a strong America and a peaceful world, I believe we'll have another Republican victory in November.

And that's where you all come in. As much as I travel and as hard as I campaign -- and campaign hard I will -- nobody can do it without the help of others. And I can't get my case out there to the American people who need to hear it all by myself. I need you, both to help the American people understand the record of these last 8 years -- all I want them to hear from you is what we have done and then, hopefully, what we can do in the future. And you know, when Cicero finished a speech, the people commented on how well he spoke. But when Demosthenes had spoken, the people cried out, "When do we march?" And I need you to help mobilize our troops out across this country. I need you to help ignite the souls and stir the hearts of the American people. And I need you to march to victory again in November.

You know, that victory isn't important just for political reasons. It is literally vital for the future of our country. And this election hinges on one crucial difference. My opponent sees the task ahead is how to manage the decline of this country. And I see it as how to open up further the golden promise of opportunity that is America. They all talk about this book out of Boston about America in decline. We are not in decline. That is too negative.

I've been proud to be a part of this administration, proud to serve this President. And now, on Thursday, I will be the standard-bearer of this party. And I'm asking you to take the hustings and to remember that you're not just political spokesmen, not just women out there spelling out what's been accomplished in the administration. You're messengers of hope for this new American revolution. And what's at stake is not just one election; what's at stake is a way of life. And if we can convince the American people of that, then I'm convinced that we will have the opportunity for the next 4 years to serve this, the greatest, freest, most wonderful country on the face of the Earth.

Thank you all. I need you. God bless you. Thank you very much. 

{/speech}
