{title} Summation and Closing Address of the Clinton Global Initiative {/title}
{event} New York, NY {/event}
{speaker} Gayle Smith {/speaker}
{date} September 22, 2006 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

I knew you were going to do that, and I was going to say something about, “And now we're both wearing these glasses,” but you're not wearing yours this morning. So, thanks a lot. {LAUGHTER} Mr. President, I want to thank you. I want to thank the exceptional moderators, panelists, and members. I also, given that global poverty is a huge problem, have two deputies, and I want to thank John Lyman and David Auerbach, who with professionalism and a sense of humor have gotten us over the finish line -- assuming that I get through these remarks. I also want to thank the team in New York that you've got behind you. They're absolutely spectacular and compensate for the fact that, as you said in your opening remarks, you are indeed a nitpicker. {LAUGHTER}

Now, in all seriousness, Mr. President, the Global Poverty Alleviation working group this year gave us a glimpse of what the world could look like, and reminded us that there are some things, like the poverty that denies our fellow citizens the rights and opportunities that we enjoy, that are bigger than all of us; things that trump politics, ego, and protocol. Mr. President, our discussions offered us a glimpse of what the world could look like if we -- all of us -- put into practice that fundamental belief we all espouse and all endorse; that belief in equality. Our working group focused on the simple fact that we can live in a world where no one lives on less than a dollar a day if we deliver on the right of the world's poor to equal access, to the tools that have made the lives of those of us in this room productive, safe, and prosperous.

Our panelists and moderators made clear that there are no insurmountable barriers to that access. Even though we have yet to forge an agreement on global trade that can make the world's markets accessible to all of the world's producers, we heard from people on the ground who are providing the world's poorest farmers with access to the tools and information that can enable them to get out from under the yoke of poverty. In Ethiopia, subsistence farmers are being transformed, slowly but surely, into commercial producers. In India, rural kiosks are providing farmers with the information and technology they need to access and build local markets.

We heard that there were no technological barriers to equal access. Affordable wireless Internet can be and is being provided to rural communities in Asia and Africa. New smart-tech water pumps are being provided to entrepreneurs across East Africa to expand the availability of safe water and create jobs at the same time. And, importantly, we heard that there are no financial barriers to access that creativity and imagination cannot overcome. We found ways to use the market to generate financing for development and created the tools to provide microfinance and insurance against risk for local producers and investors. And our members made clear that there's no shortage of ideas about how we can do more to insure that access is indeed afforded equally to all of the world's people.

In less than two hours of table discussions, our members generated thoughtful proposals for aggregate buying, bundling services, an MBA peace corps; for microinsurance and consumer incentives; for Internet based producers' forums; for socially responsible transactional charges to MP3 downloads; for microfinance bonds and for a community reinvestment act for the developing world. We focused on the principles that must guide us, the practices that can insure our success, and the progress that is being made and in which we must, all of us, invest.

Mr. President, it was your hope that by bringing together the communities that can solve the major challenges of our times, you might inspire us to work together and to commit to doing something more than simply to care. You have succeeded. This year, we had over a billion dollars in new commitments for microfinance. And as you said at the beginning, that is a huge number. But we also had a number of commitments that are less reflected in dollars than they are in the spirit that can actually change the world.

Our favorite story this year comes from two people who met at CGI, a young woman named Majora Carter we invited to speak on one of our panels who works just miles from here to transform one of the poorest communities in our country, and a successful businessman by the name of Barry Segal, who came to CGI for the first time because he wants to do something for this world. They are now partners in an effort to train people and create jobs, to care for the first and only green spaces in the South Bronx.

Our panelists, moderators, and members generated that inspiration, culminating in the fact that our table facilitators -- and just so you know, these are all people we drew from our peer groups, who volunteered their time to come broker those discussions -- they committed last night to each adopt a commitment and to offer their time, expertise, and services to make sure that it's implemented. And just as we entered this room, there was a guy chasing us down the hall saying, “We have a commitment we're going to do in the next two months, to create a new instrument for philanthropy in Asia.”

The moral of this story, Mr. President, is that we have seen a world that might exist, a world of which we can be proud, a world in which the tools for change are available to all of the world's people, a world in which all are in fact equal citizens. And as more than one speaker reminded us, poverty can only be countered when we act on the simple fact that the poor are just as powerful as any in this room if they have equal access to the rights, to the markets, to the innovation, and to the financial tools that have afforded us our privilege and promise.

We've taken practical, concrete steps toward building that world. And on behalf of the Global Poverty working group, we commit that we won't stop until we get there. Thank you. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
