{title} Remarks by President Clinton, Vice President Gore, Chairman Yasser Arafat, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, President Hosni Mubarak, and King Hussein I at Reception for Heads of State {/title}
{event} The Corcoran Gallery, Washington, D.C. {/event}
{speaker} King Hussein I {/speaker}
{date} September 28, 1995 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

President Clinton, President Mubarak, Prime Minister Rabin, President Yasser Arafat, and dear friends.

I would like to say how proud I am of this moment, of this day where both President Mubarak and I stood witness to yet another major step on the road to peace in our area, in our part of the world -- the cradle of civilization, the birthplace of the sacred Abrahamic villages, the land of the children of Abraham and their children and their descendants.

I would like to say how grateful we are for the consistent support we have received from our friends in the United States of America. Listening to my colleagues speak, I could see tears in many eyes; for, what they said, what I say, comes from the heart. We will never forget all that you have done for us, and all that you will continue to do for us. But we are partners in the cause of peace and a better future for all people, and certainly ours -- the peace of the free; a peace that incorporates all that we believe in -- democracy, pluralism, respect for human rights; a peace that gives generations to come the opportunity to build and work together and share their experiences, having conquered their fears of each other that separated them over so many years.

Both Arabs and Jews have suffered; yet, both come from the same origins. And over a long period of time -- certainly my lifetime -- there was much suffering and much loss, dear loss to us all.

Prime Minister Rabin referred to the question asked by President Clinton when we were here to sign the Washington Declaration, as to how many years did we know each other. I'll be 68, God wills it, in November, and I would like to say that probably for more than I would care to remember in the way of years. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} 

But as people in positions of responsibility, peace has always been our dream and our hope. And we sought to achieve it and turn it into a reality. Our relations passed through some very, very difficult moments -- passed through strife and tragedy. But how can you make peace with somebody you don't know? How can you make peace with someone you can't talk to? How can you explore the possibility, the venues? How can you build trust and mutual confidence in each other?

And permit me to say, from my limited experience, I have always sought to place myself in my opposite number's position, time and again. Because when peace arrives, when such a goal is achieved, it is not a question of one side winning and the other losing. The reality is that everybody wins. And for that to happen, there has to be understanding and compromise. And there has to be dedication and courage, and selflessness.

People cannot continue to live in ivory towers and watch more suffering and uncertainty and turmoil and waste, terrible waste. Let's hope that what has been achieved is on the way towards the very great goal that all of us have and share of seeing a comprehensive peace in our region.

Egypt, with its weight and position, on behalf of all in our region, was there in times of war, and was there to be the first to move to establish peace. The Palestinians, our brethren, have courageously upheld their responsibilities towards themselves and the generations to come and all their neighbors who will give them all the support we can in the times ahead, for their success will be ours.

And let's hope and pray that others will come, and we are sure that they will. And when they do, they will exhibit even greater courage because their actions will complete the circle and get us all to enjoy what we have been denied for so long. For them to join us will be more than welcome. We pray and hope it will not be long before we see them with us. And with God's will and guidance, see their contribution for the establishment of the comprehensive peace we seek. {APPLAUSE}

President Clinton, these years of your being at the helm of the great American nation have seen us come closer together than we have ever been in terms of the past mutual respect and the warmth of our relations, for we in Jordan are old friends of the United States of America. We have been comforted to know that you are with us through every moment of our endeavor to achieve peace, by your support and understanding, commitment, encouragement, courage and interest in the worthiest of causes.

And I will recall you have been with us, Prime Minister Rabin and myself, the Jordanians, the Israelis and all our brothers in the area of Aqaba and Eilat when we saw the ratification of our peace treaty. We will also remember the very moving coincidence, moving because you chose to bring Mrs. Clinton with you on her birthday that coincided with that day that will remain in the minds of all us and generations to come for all time.

It has been a long way. It has been a long struggle. But we salute the bravery, the courage -- moral, physical -- the faith, the determination of those who have come together today, not for the first time, Israelis and Palestinians, in this major step on the path to peace and reconciliation and driving away the shadows of darkness and despair and anger. And we have to be vigilant because unfortunately there are the skeptics and the enemies of peace.

But may I venture to say and state categorically that in our three great faiths and religions, there is only one call that is predominant, and that is the call of tolerance between brethren and between peoples and respect for each other and for life and the fulfillment of our duties as human beings and the worship of God.

I thank you very, very much indeed. {APPLAUSE} And it is so wonderful to be among so many friends and familiar faces, have become more so with every time we meet and every step we take towards a brighter, happier future which, God willing, we will bequeath to the generations to come within our area and in the world.

Thank you so much. And, incidentally, I think that we are very fortunate to have taken more than our share of the interest of the American people, particularly this time with the O.J. Simpson trial. {LAUGHTER}

Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
