{title} Speech to European Parliament {/title}
{event} European Parliament, Strasbourg {/event}
{speaker} Sir Henry Plumb {/speaker}
{date} December 9, 1986 {/date}
{source} http://www.margaretthatcher.org/speeches/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Mr President, Madam President-in-Office of the European Council, Mr President of the Commission, colleagues. Madam President, your statement this morning made it absolutely clear that it is important to be practical and realistic about what can and what cannot be achieved by a Council Summit. I am a great believer in giving the right work to the right people. Council Summit meetings should not get bogged down in detail but they should be involved in the outline or the design of new policies and new actions. Heads of State and Heads of Government cannot be expected to do jobs which their ministers should have done, and I am relieved that the outcome of this Summit was in many respects positive and forward looking when others in the past have sometimes been acrimonious and needlessly complicated.

There is no doubt, Madam President, that drugs, terrorism and AIDS are major problems which the EEC has a duty to deal with. It will be noted that these are problems which know no national frontiers. It shows the truth of an observation made often since the founding of the European Community itself. Indeed, the Community should of necessity take responsibility for those actions which are more efficiently performed at European level than at national level. Who can therefore deny the international tragedy of AIDS, which is just such an example? Who can deny that effective action against terrorism must be taken internationally and in the spirit of solidarity? And who can deny that the problem of drug abuse affects young people and families all over the world? I hope that the agreements reached by the Council in these areas are the beginning of a genuine common European approach and that they are not just symbols of a vague desire to work together. {APPLAUSE} 
As regards international terrorism, it is heartening to be able to acknowledge the Council's firm contribution to the defence of our citizens. There should be no concessions to terrorists or to their sponsors whether under duress or not. Madam President, I welcome the Council's determination to achieve lasting results in the fight against unemployment. Job creation measures on their own cannot work without an easing of the restrictions and the red tape which bedevil the job-creating sectors of the economy. The real jobs of the future will come from the private sector and the small business sector of a unified European market. In this respect the progress to a common internal market by 1992 must be, as you have said yourself on a number of occasions, speeded up. I particularly welcome the valuable decisions made by the Internal Market Council at the beginning of this month.

Mr Delors, you recognized the importance of the framework programme for research and technology as an essential factor in achieving the internal market. I hope we can make progress in that direction. {APPLAUSE}

The objective of achieving real reductions in the unemployment levels of Member States will be greatly helped if the internal market is established together with an adequate programme of public investment in the poorer regions of the Community. This is why this Parliament is so keen on the abolition of petty non-tariff barriers between the Member States. We know it makes sense, it makes dollars and it makes ECU. It also makes pounds for our industries and for our people. But a real common market in Europe has to be accompanied by the establishment of a real financial and monetary market and we welcome the further liberalization of capital transactions decided last month. Who would now deny that there is strength in monetary cooperation? My group regrets the absence of sterling from the exchange rate mechanism. {APPLAUSE} 

This Parliament believes that this absence is a major obstacle in the way of the European monetary system developing its full potential in the interests of the European economy overall. If we had got on the bus then, I believe our momentum would make the bus move faster. {AUDIENCE} Hear, bear! {/AUDIENCE} 

The twin problems of agricultural spending and the Community budget hardly appear in the final communiqué and I have to say that this will please neither the European farmer nor the European consumer. But I fully agree with the President-in-Office's point that the cost of storing unwanted surpluses is of no direct benefit to the farmer and it is a heavy burden on the taxpayer, and our concern in this respect must be the well-being of the rural economy. The Community will never progress if we have to wait for a perfect moment from everyone's point of view. Member States must be courageous enough to take decisions in the interests of Europe and not in the interests of national lobbies.

Mr President, I believe that nothing is gained if nothing is ventured. I am pleased that the UK Presidency has been able to report some successes. If there are some who feel that more could have been done, then let them join with us in this Parliament maintaining our pressure on the Council through the rolling programme to ensure that the gains of the last few years are not lost and that the Council realizes the force of our resolution and the dynamism of our institutional objectives. We in Parliament must take immediate advantage of the Single Act as soon as it is implemented. We may have to adapt our procedures in order to take advantage of the opportunities that we are given by this Act, and I look forward to the continuation of effective Community action in the forthcoming partnership of Parliament and the Council. I have always believed that the Community will evolve on a momentum created by its own successes. I am sure I speak for most people in this Parliament when I urge the Council to ensure that this momentum is not only maintained but that it is accelerated so that the Community can put into practice the inspiring words of the solemn declaration on European union of Stuttgart over three years ago, namely, that members of the Community exercise their will to transform the whole complex of relations between their States into a European union.

Madam President-in-Office, we must never lose sight of that ultimate goal.

{APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
