{title} Speech to European Parliament {/title}
{event} European Parliament, Strasbourg {/event}
{speaker} Jacques Delors {/speaker}
{date} December 9, 1986 {/date}
{source} http://www.margaretthatcher.org/speeches/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Mr President of the European Parliament, Madam President-in-Office of the Council, ladies and gentlemen, my speech will, in the nature of things, be complementary to the exhaustive account of the European Council meeting in London given by Mrs Thatcher. I merely wish to report to you on the modest contribution that the Commission tried to make to the success of this meeting. I shall not be expanding on the Commission's feelings. There are some grounds for satisfaction, and some for disillusionment. Only moderate satisfaction, moreover, but it would be out of place to complain now, because if the construction of Europe is not making fast progress, it is the fault of everyone, including the Commission no doubt.

I therefore simply wish to begin by telling you about the efforts made by the Commission to assist achievement of the three priorities set by the British Presidency at the start of its term, following which I shall give details of the points on which the Commission lodged appeals, if I may put it that way, before the European Council so as to draw the attention of the Heads of State or Government to dossiers which, in the absence of decisions, would compromise the steady progress and balance of the construction of Europe. Finally, I shall have a few words to say about the tour of European capitals that the Heads of State or Government asked the Commission to make.

As indicated by the British Prime Minister, the three priorities of the British Presidency were security and freedom of the citizen, fresh impetus for the process of completing the internal market, and practical action— I stress the word practical—to combat unemployment.

On the first point, security and freedom of the citizen, it is self-evident that the initiatives taken by the British Presidency have ranged far beyond the competence of the Community, and therefore of the Commission. We have nevertheless tried to add our modest contribution. In the case of drugs, the Commissioner responsible, Lord Cockfield, has devised a system for cooperation between customs services whereby information can be distributed and the efficiency of action against this scourge enhanced. As regards cancer, even though the Community has no competence in the health sphere, I find that there is considerable satisfaction to be derived from the initiative taken almost a year ago by Presidents Craxi and Mitterrand when they appointed 12 very senior professors of medicine to bring forward recommendations, these recommendations being supported, of course, by the Commission. There we have, I believe, the foundation for effective action during Cancer Information Year, which close cooperation among the Member States will make all the more effective.

However, returning to the domestic problems which are within the Commission's province, I wish to pick out one essential idea in particular: by trying to scale down the role of physical barriers within the Community and shifting the emphasis in controls to our external frontiers, the British Presidency has made a signal contribution towards completion of the internal market. If we had focused on the internal frontiers—and there were very important, cogent reasons for doing so, including the need to combat terrorism and drug trafficking—a permanent obstacle might have been put in the way of completion of the internal market. There is therefore a link, in the Commission's conception, between the objectives of freedom and security for the citizen and the more prosaic one of translating the internal market into reality. {APPLAUSE}

Secondly, progress towards completion of the internal market. With the impetus given by the British Prime Minister herself, the last Internal Market Council meeting was able to adopt directives which had previously been held up by minor but stubborn difficulties. I hope that the Internal Market Council will be able to meet again before the end of December, in accordance with the European Council's expressed wish, and more especially that it will be able to adopt texts which are not devoid of content. I am thinking in particular of the text on public supply contracts. In my opinion, for what it is worth, opening up public contracts, adopting common standards and liberalizing capital markets are three courses essential to the credibility of our efforts on behalf of business and other economic agents. It is also encouraging that in air transport, with the impetus given by the European Council, and in insurance, following the Court of Justice ruling, considerable progress in developing the internal market is going to be possible.

The third of these priorities is the campaign against unemployment: ‘business and jobs', with two very practical lines of action, one concerned with small and medium-sized businesses, the other with unemployment.

In the case of small and medium-sized businesses, the Commission had done its job, I believe, and you had an opportunity to judge for yourselves, since we sent you the document that was to be submitted to the European Council. In particular, I hope that it will be possible during the first quarter of next year for the Council to adopt the proposals for directives concerning the VAT threshold and simplification of the system as applied to small and medium-sized businesses. Since these arrangements are partly optional, I cannot see why certain States would continue to oppose a text which could have a major influence on the propensity to create and develop small businesses.

With regard to the campaign against unemployment, I have to acknowledge that there are divergences between Member States and also between the British Presidency and the Commission. For my own part, I feel that, if action in this field is to be really effective, it is necessary to get the cooperative strategy for growth under way, intensify social dialogue—an area where we have in point of fact achieved some progress during this half-year—and, finally, place the emphasis on long-term unemployment, along the lines of the specific proposals that we made to the European Council. That concludes my comments on the British Presidency's three priorities.

Of course, the European Council, as the Commission sees it, is also a body responsible for assessing progress in the construction of Europe and stimulating further action. On three points, frankly, some of the results of recent Council meetings have been disappointing. I refer to the cooperative strategy for growth, the multiannual research and technology programme, and Erasmus, a student exchange programme of modest dimensions.

The European Council addressed itself to these three points and saw fit to send a signal to the various Councils. In the case of the cooperative strategy for growth, the Commission will report every three months to the Finance Ministers who, I hope, can be prevailed upon to come out of their isolation and do something other than pay lip service to this text without doing anything about it. {APPLAUSE}

I should like to point out that if this cooperative strategy for growth had been put into effect a year ago we could have looked forward—and this can be demonstrated—to an extra point on the growth rate in 1987, which would have meant an appreciable fall in unemployment. Moreover, we would have given a measure of hope to the developing countries, since every additional point on the growth rate in Europe will be reflected by stronger growth in the developing countries. But it is never too late to do the right thing. {APPLAUSE}

Where the research and technology programme was concerned, we could not ask the Heads of State or Government to concern themselves with the figures, but we simply wanted them to make clear that this was a priority matter. At the risk of wearing myself out, I repeat that the Commission expects to be treated with dignity over this issue. {APPLAUSE}

When we submitted this programme, on which Parliament has done a great deal of work, for which I thank it, I was immediately told: ‘You are asking for 77 billion, so we can agree on 3 or 4 billion'. I reject this way of going about things. The Commission did not open the bidding at 10 with a view to agreeing terms at 5. {APPLAUSE}

The Research Ministers are meeting today, and I have asked the Commission to authorize me to withdraw the text if the response remains on this tack. {APPLAUSE}

Coming to the third point, Erasmus, the European Council gave consideration to this scheme also. Here again, I have to mention that education, like health, is outside the range of Community competence, as we know. But this student exchange programme does fall within the scope of what we have termed ‘People's Europe', a priority theme adopted by the European Council at several of its meetings.

What is the object of the exercise? It involves making the modest sum of 175 m ECU available for the purpose of facilitating cooperation between university vice-chancellors, and promoting and funding bursaries enabling students to pursue their studies at various universities in different Member States.

I hope that the General Affairs Council will reach a favourable conclusion on this minor problem at its meeting next Monday and Tuesday. But we cannot settle for what has been suggested to us, the first part only of the Erasmus programme, namely cooperation between university vice-chancellors, with no action on the second part, bursaries to promote student exchanges. If this meeting holds back and refers the matter to an Education Council, we shall be no further forward six months hence and the 25 m ECU that you entered in the 1987 budget will go begging. This is a good illustration of the drawbacks of the Community's piecemeal decision-making process, given that there is no Council responsible for drawing all the strands together, which would make for more effective results. {APPLAUSE}

I turn now to the third point discussed by the British Prime Minister, which I shall define, modestly, as the conditions required for effective application of the Single Act. The Member States, let it not be forgotten, entered into commitments in a Single Act, an expression that no one understands. Let us call it a ‘European Act' modifying the Treaty of Rome. At the British Prime Minister's request, I had the opportunity to present an analysis of the problems facing the Community. I have not made any mention of this so far, not even at the British Prime Minister's press conference, but I should like, since you are elected parliamentarians, to outline the Commission's analysis for you. It will only take a moment. We can go into more detail later.

First, on the financial side, the Community needs a system adequate for the purposes of carrying the Single Act through, and that means a stable, guaranteed system. The guarantees must be extended to the countries which contribute most as well as to others. In a way, it is a matter of setting limits, over a period of 7 to 8 years, on the financial calls that are made on European citizens, so that we would be placing ourselves under a duty to make better use of resources.

The day of resorting to expedients to produce an apparently balanced budget are over. Such expedients can no longer be used, they are no longer adequate, whether we are talking about the accumulating agricultural stocks, the wide gap between commitment appropriations and payment appropriations, or the carry-over of the year's budget deficit to the next, as we are once again going to see this year. That is just saving face. These methods, these expedients, no longer measure up to the situation. {APPLAUSE}

Secondly, the worldwide situation in agriculture. Because of our position in the world, we have no option but to undertake reform of the common agricultural policy on a more drastic scale, whether we like it or not, because the situation worldwide is as it is, and it is not in our power to remodel it as we please. Of course, as I gladly acknowledge, progress has been made over the past four years, since 1984. Had it not been for the reforms that have been made, the cost of the agricultural policy this year would have been 4 m ECU more than it has been. But this is not enough. Why not? Because the volume of supply is constantly expanding while demand remains stable. If we go on like this, we are going to lose credit, not only commercially but politically as well, with countries in the Third World and also with the other agricultural producer countries. {APPLAUSE}

We cannot on the one hand make fine speeches about having spearheaded the success of the Punta del Este meeting and on the other hand ignore the need to put our own affairs in order as far as agriculture is concerned. That is unacceptable, in terms of the Community's image and its political influence in the world as well. {APPLAUSE}

Finally, the third dimension: cohesion. I'm sorry, but I have to be blunt about this. Cohesion was central to the discussions among the Heads of State or Government, more so than had been anticipated no doubt. The fact is that, with the Single Act, we now have a choice between two formulas, or rather three: the first is a free-trade area in name only, with each country hanging on to its privileges; next there is a real free-trade area, but one with redistribution of budget resources to offset the hardship caused to the more backward countries; the third option, which is embodied in the Single Act and is the only sure course towards achievement of the European Union, is a common economic space. It is along the lines of this last opinion that the Commission is working. Naturally, this presupposes extensive recasting of policy on the structural funds. {APPLAUSE}

I have been asked to undertake a tour of Community capitals. This makes no change whatsoever to the Commission's institutional role, nor does it have any effect on Parliament's powers, but I am looking on this mission as that of a mediator trying to ensure that countries do not publicy adopt unduly entrenched positions and do not plunge the Community back into one of those periods of lethargy that have regrettably punctuated its history.

The Commission is getting on with its work. It will have completed its broad guidelines, with a limited range of options, by the end of the year, as planned, and I shall then seek meetings in the various capitals, the working methods for which will be as chosen by each Prime Minister or each Council chairman, so that I shall either go alone or be accompanied by appropriate colleagues, according to Member States' preference.

However, I can immediately announce that I shall be making contact with the President of Parliament and the Enlarged Bureau in order to bring you into this collective review of the situation, but I must stress the need for discretion in these consultations: it would be quite wrong for the spirit that prompted this mission to be destroyed by ill-considered words. But Parliament will, I assure you, be involved in this process.

{APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
