{title} Transcript: Keynote Address of President Clinton at Campus Progress National Student Conference {/title}
{event} Campus Progress National Student Conference {/event}
{speaker} John D. Podesta {/speaker}
{date} July 13, 2005 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. We had to call it {COMMENT="Inaudible"} there for a second, but I think that President Clinton and Stephanie are now outside and let me introduce them. Yes? There they are. {APPLAUSE}

Thank you all and I can't tell you how proud I am of welcoming you to the first ever Campus Progress National Student Conference. You know, I heard – I sat in this morning and heard about how conservative groups have pumped resources – over $37 million a year – to push their policies on America's college campuses. We've also said, I think, this morning that Campus Progress wants to pursue some of the same kinds of activities that the right's been engaged in, like communicating ideas and promoting new leaders and bringing people together across single-issue divides to create a larger progressive movement, but I've got a little concern about all of this because you have to kind of look at the products of the conservative campus machine.

We saw the quotes from Ann Coulter or then there is Dinesh D'Souza, and of course there is Karl Rove, the 1973 chairman of College Republicans. As they used to say in my day, he's got some explaining to do. Kind of makes you wonder what their seminars looked like. You've got a whole range of them this afternoon: how to smear an ambassador, how to lie from the White House press podium without your nose growing long. Well, I've had some success in this business and I want to tell you, you can fight hard for what you believe without breaking the law, without cheating, and certainly without checking your morals at the door. {APPLAUSE}

I think we're about to see a new day in American politics because the news today is that progressive students are organizing. The news today is that they are mobilizing. The news is that the far right has had its say and now it's your turn, and helping make your voice heard is what the Center for American Progress and Campus Progress are all about. I hope this fall and in the years to come you'll work with Campus Progress; publish in blog on campusprogress.org; work with us to start a publication on your campus and to bring speakers to your campus; work with us to create a true community of progressives and stand up for positive change on all the issues that matter.

Forty years ago when he accepted the Nobel Peace Price, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. said, “I have the audacity to believe that peoples everywhere can have three meals a day for their body, education and culture for their minds, and dignity, equality and freedom for their spirits.” The reason you are here today is because you share that audacity to believe. You have the audacity to believe that we can build a more just, a more prosperous, a more inclusive America. You have the audacity to believe that we can again lead the world through the strength of our vision and the power of our ideals. And you have the audacity to believe that it may take some time, but if we stand together and work together, we could turn our country around.

One way we'll succeed is by riding the waves of new technologies and innovation. Ten years ago there weren't many multimedia web publications. Now we can bring students and student publications together at campusprogress.org. New groups like MoveOn and tools like Meetup can bring people together not only online, but face-to-face to mobilize for change. Today, someone like my friend Laurie David, who is alarmed over global warming and outraged over the indifference to it demonstrated by so many of our leaders, can mobilize the world in a flash. She is doing it with the virtual march on Washington to stop global warming. Check it out, please. It's stopglobalwarming.org and please join the march.

I think you share the belief that individuals can make a difference. If you do, I have one thing to tell you, you're right. I could say that because as one of the earlier generations of activists, I've seen how young people are able to put their dreams to work. I've seen them build their skills on campus, learn to organize, become involved in the political process, and make progressive change happen. Where did they end up? Some went on to become legislators, some became mayors, some became union leaders, some became priests, some became rabbis, some became ministers, and one – only one – went on to become the president of the United States.

I met him in 1970 when I was in college and he was in law school, which makes him, of course, much older than me. {LAUGHTER} We both believe that politics could make the lives of ordinary people better and could make America better. I've been fortunate to work with him since then and we are all fortunate that he is with us today because whether it's winning healthcare for millions of children, standing up for racial equality, protecting a worker's right to join a union, fighting HIV/AIDS or waking this country up to the threat of global warming, Bill Clinton never forgot where he came from and he stayed true to progressive values that we share. He still does that today.

We're all aware that he is now leading the UN's effort to rebuild the regions devastated by the tsunami, but that's only part of his work. Through the William J. Clinton Foundation, he is mobilizing world support to combat HIV/AIDS in Africa. He has launched an important new economic development initiative in Harlem and he is continuing his efforts to promote public service.

To present President Clinton, please join me in welcoming an outstanding young woman from Swarthmore College, who is a founder of the Genocide Intervention Fund, a student-run group actively trying to bring an end to the genocide in Darfur. Stephanie comes from Rwanda. {APPLAUSE} She is going to – Stephanie is going to tell you a little bit about her personal story. It's one of great courage and strength, and today she is devoting her energy to fighting for a safer and better world for others threatened by hate and violence. The Center for American Progress has been an enthusiastic supporter of the work of Stephanie and the other leaders of the Genocide Intervention Fund, and to me their commitment, their passion has come to embody what progressive student activism is at its best. Please welcome; join me in welcoming Stephanie Nyombayire. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
