{title} Statements of Senator John F. Kennedy and Senator Llyndon B. Johnson at the Farm Conference {/title}
{event} Des Moines, Iowa {/event}
{speaker} John F. Kennedy {/speaker}
{date} August 21, 1960 {/date}
{source} http://www.jfklink.com/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Lyndon opened with a statement "fellow farmers," but I am not quite ready to go quite that far.
I want to say, after Hubert I don't think Nixon can be quite that rough. After running against Hubert, it is all going to be easy. Any time any "truth squad" or Senator Scott or the Vice President says anything unkind about me or gets rough or anything, I will say, "I have been through it much tougher than this in Wisconsin and West Virginia."
In any case, I am delighted to have him with me now, and I must say that he has been a constant friend since our traveling days together in Wisconsin and West Virginia.
I think this is an important conference. This conference has two purposes: First, because we were anxious, Senator Johnson and myself, to establish contact with farmers in the Midwest of the United States in order to get their latest views and their reactions to the Democratic platform, and also because this is the only meeting we have had and will have in the month of August, which both of us are going to attend, which demonstrates our strong feeling that this is the No.4 domestic issue in the United States today, the problem of the family farm. {APPLAUSE}
I talked to Governor Loveless at Cape Cod, and I said I thought that we should have a farm conference, and I hoped that he would take the leadership in it. This is the result. This is the work that he has done in the month that has elapsed since our meeting. I want to express our appreciation to him for the leadership he has given to this conference, to the Members of Congress, to Senator Kefauver who has been through an exhausting campaign and yet came out here to lend a helping hand to the Democratic Party again - {APPLAUSE} - and to Congressman Poage and the others from an entirely different part of the United States, but who recognize the interdependence of the American economy.
I come from Massachusetts, but my State and this country cannot possibly move ahead unless the farmers of this country move ahead. I don't think that any farmer in the United States is going to buy the crop of campaign promises that are going to be made in 1960 by the Republican candidate in view of the fact that they bought even better campaign promises in 1952, and also to Senator Symington, who has served on the Agriculture Committee, who has associated himself with us in this campaign and who was with us this afternoon - this is a great party. I think it is dedicated to the improvement of American agriculture, and it has been throughout its entire history since the time that a farmer, Thomas Jefferson, founded the Democratic Party. Its strength down through the days of Bryan and all of the rest has been in the Midwestern United States, and in the farmers of this country, South and Southwest. So this is an important election. I think that those of you who served in Congress know that there is not any use in electing a Democratic House and a Democratic Senate. We have had that the last 6 years. But unless you have an administration and a Secretary of Agriculture and a President who will support a program, then the Congress is up against a stone wall. The President of the United States has vetoed bill after bill, and if a Republican President is again elected, he will veto bill after bill. So this is a joint effort in which we are engaged. I think that if we are going to do anything to move the American farmer ahead like he must be, if this economy is going to be maintained throughout the country, we need a Democratic House and a Democratic Senate. I say this - even though I know I am the candidate - we need also a Democratic President and Vice President if we are going to do the job.
I ask your help. I think this job is going to be done. I think we can win this election in the heartland of the United States. I think the Republicans are in trouble. We are going to campaign in every one of these States. We want your help.
Governor Freeman mentioned the fact that I brought to the floor and passed a bill for $1.25 minimum wage. That is my responsibility, and I am chairman of the Subcommittee on Labor. President Eisenhower recommended 2 weeks ago that the Congress adopt a minimum wage bill. When that bill came for a final passage, the Democrats voted for it 3 to 1, but a majority of the Republicans led by Senator Dirksen and Senator Goldwater and Senator Bridges, the three most powerful Republicans on that side, all voted against it. A majority of them opposed $1.25 minimum wage by 1964.
Now, what is true of the minimum wage is true of agricultural programs. We are going to hear more commitments to more social welfare programs in the next 3 months, but in the final analysis when they come to the vote, and when they come for the President's signature, they are going to be opposed. It has always been that way in the Republican Party, and it is that way. That is why I think it is important that we win this election. Thank you. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
