{title} Question and Answer Period Following Speech of Senator John F. Kennedy, Mormon Tabernacle {/title}
{event} Salt Lake City, Utah {/event}
{speaker} John F. Kennedy {/speaker}
{date} September 23, 1960 {/date}
{source} http://www.jfklink.com/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Obviously that is the key, how can we stop the advance of world communism, how can we maintain the peace, how can we maintain our security, how can we live on the same globe as the Communists, both of us having a hydrogen capacity, and survive?
I would say that is the great problem that is going to be before the next President of the United States. In addition, the problem before him is how a free society can successfully compete with a totalitarian society.
Briefly, I would suggest the next President of the United States should consider doing the following things, maybe not in the order of their importance, but all of them should be done soon.
In the first place, I would request the Congress to appropriate additional funds, particularly for strengthening our conventional forces, for speeding up the Minuteman and several other of our missile programs in order that we may not move through a missile gap period in the years 1961,1962, and 1963. {APPLAUSE}
I think it is possible, by a reunification, by a more effective unification of our Armed Forces. And Senator Symington, of Missouri, has been appointed chairman of a committee which is making a study now of the Pentagon, to see if we can provide a more effective organization within the Pentagon, more effective purchasing programs and all the rest. It may be possible for us to save some money. I hope it is. But I would strengthen the Armed Forces of the United States. We deal not only with the Soviet Union, but we deal with the Chinese Communists, and the whole debate is whether the Chinese Communists will be successful in their viewpoint which is that Communist conquest of the world can only come by war. We have to look forward to the day when the Chinese Communists will have a missile capacity and a hydrogen capacity dedicated to the proposition that war is the solution and that they could survive it and we could not. So I think we better make a better effort there.
Secondly, I think we are to parley. If we are strong, if we maintain our defenses, if we are second to none, we are in a better position to negotiate. Winston Churchill said 11 years ago, "You cannot negotiate successfully with the Communists unless you do so from a position of equality." One of the reasons we have been unable to secure an effective disarmament policy in outer space was because the Soviet Union was ahead of us and they said they would not agree to any disarmament of outer space unless we also abandoned our bases overseas, because they said they would be giving up their lead. In other words, maintaining a position of equality permits you to negotiate more successfully. It is a source of concern to me that this Government has had less than 100 people scattered through the entire Federal Government working on the subject of disarmament. I would put more people into it. I would indicate our desire not only to maintain our strength, but also to provide for orderly disarmament.
Thirdly, I would hope that the United States could make for effective judgments of the events that are going to occur. I mentioned our aid to Latin America being a result of our difficulties with Castro. I am chairman of the Subcommittee on Africa. We talk now of what we are going to do about Africa but the problems have been there for many years. I said earlier at dinner tonight that the United States offered 300 scholarships to the Congo. They never talked about the Congo before June. There are only 12 or 15 college people in all of the Congo. Is it any wonder that they have difficulty running a free society? Did we ever concern ourselves with the educational need of Africa in the last 10 years? We give less than 200 scholarships for all of Africa, by the Federal Government, to study here in the United States, and yet the need for Africa is not only economic development funds, but to educate its men and women if they are going to maintain their societies.
So I would have thought it would have been possible for us to make some judgments some years ago. {APPLAUSE}
Third, I would say also that the United States is going to face a severer crisis and a serious problem for us in the case of India in the winter of 1961. The Indian 5-year plan is coming forward. I think India represents the best chance we have in the underdeveloped world. Thirty-five percent of the people of the underdeveloped world live in India. It has a distinguished head of government. It has an excellent civil service. It has good economic planning and staggering problems. If India fails to solve her economic problems, if her economic growth increases marginally year by year and the Chinese Communists starting at the same level as the Indians did in 1950 move ahead 10, 12 percent in their economic growth, then of course the battle for supremacy in Asia will have been lost.
I think long-term loans of the kind that made the United States so rich - we built the economy of the West, the railroads and all the West, mostly on the funds that were loans to us for private purposes from Europe at the beginning of this century. I think that the United States, from the point of view of public loans and I have supported the strengthening of the development loan funds, should provide assistance with other rich Western European countries, particularly the Germans and I hope the Japanese, who will join with us in assisting India to make an economic breakthrough. {APPLAUSE}
There are many other areas, but just let me say that I have had a strong conviction for many years, and I spoke of the matter in the case of Indochina and later in Algeria, that the greatest asset we have is the desire of all these people to be free and independent. Therefore, if the United States would associate itself with that drive, if the United States would be known as we used to be known, as the friend of freedom, not only for ourselves, but also for people all around the world - and one of our difficulties has been that we have talked about the enslavement of Eastern Europe and never said a word about Africa for the last 10 years - unless we stand for the principle as it affects our friends as well as our enemies, then we really lose our moral standing and we lose identification with what is the most powerful force in the world today, and the force that represents the greatest source of strength for us.
We want to be independent. We want others to be independent, and they want to be independent. Therefore, I have felt that the United States for some years should speak strongly for independence for all people, Eastern Europe and Africa and Latin America, antidictators, whether it is Castro or some other dictator who may be friendly to us, because these people are going to be independent, and when they finally are, I want them to say, "The United States are our friends. They believe what we believe, that the Communists are our enemies." {APPLAUSE}
May I say in closing that you have been extremely generous tonight and I am most honored to have had a chance to come tonight. I am grateful for the courtesy and attention which you have given. Running for the Presidency is a very sobering responsibility. President Moyle said today, "You are not as gay as you used to be." {LAUGHTER} Well, I think it is a very difficult and somber time. In many ways, this election is more important than the election of 1932, because in 1932, what was at stake was the preservation of freedom in the United States, and now what is at stake is the preservation of freedom around the world. {APPLAUSE}
I really believe that the United States is the great hope for freedom. If we meet our responsibilities, if we meet our obligations, if we maintain our strength, if we build our educational systems, if our economic growth is increasing each year, if we develop our resources, if we build a strong and vital society here in the United States, then I think we can lead the free world. So I come here tonight as a candidate for the oldest party in the world that is successfully operating today, the Democratic Party, and I come with some pride in a party which has produced at critical times men like Jefferson, Jackson, Wilson, Roosevelt, and Truman. {APPLAUSE} I hope that the Democratic Party - I hope that our party can play a useful role today. I hope this election will not sink to be a name-calling contest between my opponent and myself. I hope we serve a great national purpose of presenting to the American people alternative courses of action, and I think if we do that, and that requires the effort of all of us - not merely the candidate on one level or another, but all of us - I think the Democratic Party can serve once again.
I will close by reminding you of the election of 1860, when, as Lincoln said, the question was whether the Nation would exist half slave and half free. Now the question is whether the world will exist half slave and half free. And in that campaign of 1860, Lincoln wrote to a friend, "I know there is a God and that He hates injustice. I see the storm coming. But if He has a place and a part for me, I believe that I am ready."
Now, 100 years later, we know there is a God and we know He hates injustice, and we see the storm coming, but if He has a place and a part for us, I believe that we are ready. Thank you. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
