{title} Remarks by the President and General John Shalikashvili in Farewell Ceremony {/title}
{event} Fort Myer, Virginia {/event}
{speaker} John Shalikashvili {/speaker}
{date} September 30, 1997 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Mr. President, Mrs. Clinton, Vice President and Mrs. Gore, Secretary and Mrs. Cohen; my special friend, Secretary Albright; National Security Advisor Berger, members of the Diplomatic Corps, other members of the Cabinet, other distinguished Members of Congress; my mentor and friend, Secretary Bill Perry and Lee Perry; Secretary and Mrs. Hamry, Secretary West, Secretary and Mrs. Dalton; my friend, General Nalman, Chairman of NATO's Military Committee; fellow Chiefs of Defense here present, thank you for coming such a long distance.

Members of the Joint Chiefs, present and past, Commanders-In-Chief of our Unified Command, distinguished guests; Joanie, Brant, friends and family who have come near and far. And men and women of our Armed Forces, so splendidly, splendidly represented here this morning by these magnificent soldiers, sailors, airmen, Marines, Coast Guardsmen, standing so tall and standing so proud here before us. Please join me in giving them a very well-deserved round of applause. {APPLAUSE}

What a great day, despite these clouds. What a great day to be a soldier. Thank you, Secretary Cohen. Thank you, Mr. President, for those very kind, very kind words. And, thank you, Mr. President, for the award of the Medal of Freedom, and I am so deeply honored.

And let me say, as well, that it is a privilege to leave this office knowing that I will be relieved by General Hugh Shelton -- a friend, a combat veteran decorated for heroism, a true professional and an inspired choice to lead our Armed Forces into the 21st century.

And I thank you, Mr. President, and I thank you, too, Mr. Vice President, for all that you have done these past four years to keep America's Armed Forces the very best in the world, and for all your concern for the safety of our men and women and for their welfare and for the welfare of their families.

Mr. President, it has been an honor, indeed, to have served under your command. Thank you.

A short while ago I received a new set of orders, as I have so many times in the past. These orders, my retirement orders, contain a notation that reminded me that I have now served 39 years, three months, and one day on active duty.

To some of you here, this must sound like a very, very long period of time. In my own life, if I were to measure the distance between my earliest memories of Warsaw, Poland, my birthplace, and this podium here today, it might seem like a very long journey indeed. But in truth, these 39 years have passed by in a wink of an eye. For it seems like only yesterday that I, a brand new draftee from Peoria, Illinois, started my journey as a wide-eyed trainee in the green hills of Fort Leonardwood, Missouri; only yesterday that I felt the biting cold of the Alaskan winter while serving as a brand new lieutenant with the Manchus of the First Battle Group, 9th Infantry; only yesterday that I experienced the stifling afternoon heat of the rice paddies in the jungles of Vietnam; or that in Germany, at Grevenbroich, I heard the roar of the guns of the 1st Armored Division; or bathed in the dust at Yakima with the motorized soldiers of the 9th Division; and only yesterday, in the mountains of northern Iraq, I watched with pride as American soldiers and soldiers from a dozen nations worked feverishly to give life back to hundreds of thousands of Kurds who had been driven into these mountains by Saddam Hussein and left there to perish.

These experiences seem like only yesterday, because in the history of our nation and our military they are but a fleeting moment, a moment replayed day in and day out on a thousand posts and camps and stations from Kuwait to Kansas, from Pearl Harbor to the Persian Gulf, from Germany to Korea.

For a peacetime era, these past four years have been a period of unprecedented military activity and unmatched operational excellence. Each time the call came, America's forces were ready; and each time, they performed magnificently. Whether maintaining a strong deterrent against aggression on the Korean Peninsula, ensuring Saddam Hussein remembers the penalty for turning his fury against his neighborhoods or his own people, providing humanitarian assistance for the dying in Rwanda, bringing an end to violence in Haiti, or extending the hand of friendship to former adversaries and new partners through NATO's Partnership for Peace, our men and women did all that America asked of them and more.

And in the process, they proved themselves, to friend and foe alike, the best military in the world, bar none. Others might envy us our high technology equipment, but they stand in awe of our young men and women in uniform and the sergeants and the petty officers who lead them.

To paraphrase the late General Abrams, people aren't in the Armed Forces, people are the Armed Forces. Not personnel, but living, breathing people -- tough people, ethical people, trained people, people working together to get the job done, worldwide, year after year -- not just for 39 years, but for over two centuries. Our men and women in uniform were always, are now, and forever will be the key to our operational excellence. And no technology is about to change that.

We must never forget their sacrifice. We must never underestimate their importance. And we must never cut back on our support for them or for their families.

And just as people are the lifeblood of our Armed Forces, so they have been the joy of my years in uniform. I have worked for and served with the very best -- from Sergeant Greiss, who taught me how to care for soldiers, to General Lester L. Wheeler who instilled in me the essence of being an officer, to thousands of others all the way up to my friend, Colin Powell, who mentored me on the responsibilities of being a Chairman.

And while Chairman, I have been blessed to work for three great Secretaries -- the late Les Aspin, Bill Perry, and now Bill Cohen -- all men of character, men of brilliance, men dedicated to building a strong defense. And no one, no one could ask for better bosses or more dedicated Americans to look after our men and women in uniform. I thank you.

And I've been blessed, and indeed, America has been blessed, to have the great generals and admirals that we have had leading the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Marines and the Coast Guard during these very turbulent years. Danny, Jay, Ed, Chuck, Bob, I thank you for your support, your wise counsel and certainly for your friendship.

And we have been blessed as well to have had such outstanding leaders as our Unified Commanders. I can't say enough to praise all of you and the great work that you have done to give America a joint force equal to her own greatness.

And to the Vice Chairman, General Joe Ralston, my dear friend, you are a consummate professional and a model of selfless service. Every honor that I have received today owes much to your wisdom, your tireless work and your devotion to our nation.

And to the Joint Staff, you lead the way. You are the finest military staff, and much of our operational excellence springs from your unmatched professionalism.

But when all is said and done, it is my family to whom I owe the greatest debt of gratitude. Joanie, these 30 years together have been the most wonderful journey; you and I holding hands every step of the way. How lucky I am to be married to my best friend, who shares my love for soldiers, who has given so much to them and to their families. Joanie, we always said that together we could make it, for that's the kind of stuff we're made of. Well, we've made it. Duck, I love you.

And to you, Brant, many thanks, for having put up with all of my absences from home while you were growing up, all the many moves, all the missed soccer games, and despite that, having become the fine young man that you are. Your mother and I are prouder of you than you will ever know.

Forty-five years ago, my parents, my brother Othar, my sister Gayle and I came to the shores of this great nation. And America took us in and opened its heart to us. In time, it allowed me to rise from private to Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. What a reflection on this grand land of opportunity. Only -- only in America.

Now, let me close with a word to the soldiers with whom I shared this 39-year journey. Many years ago, when he was asked what his last wish would be, Black Jack Pershing said that when the last bugle is sounded, I want to stand with my soldiers. And so, when -- the last bugle sounds, I hope to stand with you, as ramrod straight and as proud as you stand before us here today. In the years to come, no matter what I do, no matter where I go, no matter what I will become, in my heart I pray, I will always remain one of you -- a soldier.

Mr. President, it has been a great honor to wear the uniform of this great nation and to serve you. And I thank you for that privilege. And may God bless you, sir, and may God bless this extraordinary land of ours. Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
