{title} Remarks by the President And Other Participants in Democratic Leadership Forum, The Third Way: Progressive Governance for the 21st Century {/title}
{event} Democratic Leadership Forum, The Third Way: Progressive Governance for the 21st Century {/event}
{speaker} Massimo D'Alema {/speaker}
{date} April 25, 1999 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} Remarks by President and NATO Leaders in DLC Roundtable {/description}

{speech} 

First of all, let me tell you that this meeting of NATO leaders has been a great success, and this wasn't at all to be taken for granted. This summit was held during hard times because a war is a war. It is a burden to bear, even when this war is waged with very good motivations and with very great belief in these motivations.

We have come out of this summit more united, more determined, and there are differences, but they are differences in the tones that were used. But we do have a common strategy, and this strategy aims at achieving a just peace. We said, and we stated at the summit that we shall not rest at peace until these people who have been deported and humiliated go back to their homes. We intend to use both force and politics to achieve this goal. Then some of us maybe threaten the use of force more, and others are stressing the use of politics, rather. But this is not really a division among us.

Italy is right there, very close to the scene -- we're a front-line country. But Italy is not outside the action that is being carried on. We have 42 aircraft; we have helicopters engaged; we have 5,000 troops in Bosnia, Macedonia and Albania; we have 2,000 Italian civilians who are assisting and providing relief to refugees in Albania; we have ships doing the work, together with the other forces of the Atlantic Alliance. We have been there right from the start and we shall be there to the end. {APPLAUSE}

This is something that I wanted to say. There's a saying between Germans and Italians, according to which Germans love Italians and Italy; whereas Italians respect Germans and Germany. I have answered to those who reminded me of this expression -- I find the Germans very lovable. And I do think that Italians must be respected, or must learn to become respectable. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} 

This is very important for me. Italy's a serious country when it takes up an engagement, and a commitment; even when such commitments have to be taken with a heavy heart, as in this circumstance.

The Third Way, in my opinion, is a major cultural challenge, first of all. In the course of this century, we have experienced open democratic societies -- very dynamic ones, very competitive ones. But these societies also have suffered a sickness -- social injustice. In these societies, it is easy to race towards success, but at the same time in these societies, those who do not make it dropped out, and they are left at the margins.

At the same time we've had other experiences, societies that were able to develop systems of solidarity and social protection, but through heavy bureaucratic systems in such a way that these systems have, in fact, slowed down development, dynamics and the possibility of attaining success.

The Third Way is the effort to find a meeting point between the positive aspects of these two major experiences. Is it possible to have a dynamic economics and the society based on solidarity? I think it is. But this is a challenge. There is no prescription that you can write down for this. It is an attempt, an effort that is pursued day after day. The Third Way is not an ideology. The answers are to be found day after day and have to be tried and tested. The need for a Third Way is the result of a crisis of ideologies, not of the victory of ideologies.

So I like to raise this issue also when talking about values and cultures. The idea of social solidarity in the 20th century all too often was accompanied by the idea of authoritarianism. And freedom, all too often, has shown the face of inequality. And the conflict between these values has left a deep mark on the 20th century. It has even been an armed conflict, the conflict between solidarity and freedom. If we intend to open up the way to a new age, we must find a peaceful coexistence between solidarity and freedom.

I think that this approach to the issue has also got something to do with the question of the dialogue between Europe and America. America, after all, has been and is the great dynamic country, being dynamic and the country of progress. West Europe in different ways has experienced systems of solidarity through authoritarianism in Eastern Europe and through democracy in the West, but with some bureaucracy involved in the West, too.

For geographic reasons maybe, Tony Blair is sort of a bridge between these two cultures and these two experiences. But I think this is an important and positive role to play. And I think he is performing this role, and will perform this role, effectively if he involves the whole of the European left in this dialogue. This is a problem. This is a question. I think we Europeans should not be divided. I think we should move towards this new cultural challenge united.

I'd like to say a few things on the questions that were asked -- I'm trying to be a bit more precise in my answers, but let me say -- in order to win this challenge, probably we'll need less national government, less central government, but greater governance over local processes. I think the direction of our efforts -- when we talk of crisis of community, well the crisis is of national communities, particularly when it is accompanied by an ethnic and religious view of what the national community is. But our leverage should be local communities, should be the actual physical community among people. The living community of people -- because solidarity, as it is developed at that level is less bureaucratic, less cumbersome.

And we should introduce a notion of a global community, as well. After all, what have these new friends who have opened up to the dialogue with the West and with America told us? They have told us that if we wish to guarantee peace, we should give these people a chance, an opportunity of development and growth. They have told us that we cannot be content with just giving opportunities to the individuals who live within our societies; that is not enough. We have a larger responsibility there. We must give opportunities to people, and we should have a global view of responsibility and community.

In the official fora, I expressed no congratulations or words of thanks to the President of the United States. Maybe that was too official. I'd like to say a few words here, sincerely speaking, with great sincerity. In these days, we have been successful because President Clinton didn't just talk the language of force and determination, he also has spoken words of hope. And I think we shall be successful if we keep this hope alive, and if we feed it through concrete choices.

In a few days, we shall meet in the G-7. We will have to talk about debt of the poorer countries. Tomorrow, there will be the discussion on the interim committee of the Monetary Fund. I think the real challenge of the Third Way is to take action, take decisions, which are difficult. It was difficult to decide to go and fight for Kosovo. We should show the same determination when we decide to pardon the debt of the poorest countries that will never be able to pay back because they're too poor. We should show the same determination and force in taking the decisions that are needed to seed hope. And that's what I wanted to say.

Thank you. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
