{title} Speech to European Parliament {/title}
{event} European Parliament, Strasbourg {/event}
{speaker} Margaret Thatcher {/speaker}
{date} December 9, 1986 {/date}
{source} http://www.margaretthatcher.org/speeches/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Mr President, thank you very much for your supreme kindness and courtesy.

We were talking a few moments ago about difficult decisions which have to be made about the common agricultural policy. Of course we all accept the need to preserve the health and vitality of a rural Community and the prosperity of Europe's countryside but we have to do so in ways which make more sensible use of the very large resources that we are devoting to the common agricultural policy. At present we have an absurd situation where farm incomes decrease while budgetary costs increase. I am pleased that the European Parliament has added its voice to those calling for essential reforms to make agriculture more responsive to the needs of the marketplace and to see that money spent goes to the farmer and is not dissipated on surpluses. The message which President Pflimlin sent to me last week and to which I drew attention in the European Council was timely and welcome.

It is no good believing that decisions will become easier if we postpone them. There are no easy decisions. We have to take hard decisions and take them soon, or events will overtake us and the money will run out. Then, instead of well-ordered decisions for a coherent policy, we risk seeing a disorderly retreat into a series of national measures.

At the European Council last week the President of the Commission informed Heads of State and Government of the work which the Commission is preparing on the financing of the Community, on the common agricultural policy and on cohesion. It was agreed that Mr Delors would visit capitals in order to report further on this work and on the possible options for action. In the meantime, Mr President, the European Council agreed that work must continue and decisions be taken in the specialist councils. Both the Presidency and the European Parliament are looking to the Agriculture Council now in session.

We have in front of us another crucial item of unfinished business—a Community budget for 1987—on which my colleague was speaking when I came in. I recall the exemplary cooperation between the Council and Parliament which enabled us to reach agreement on the 1986 budget within 10 days of the beginning of our Presidency. I hope that together we may be equally successful this week about agreeing a budget for 1987.

The priority of the United Kingdom Presidency has been to make the Community work better for the benefit of individual citizens. Some may say that we have our eyes too much on the ground rather than on the distant horizons. But you do not reach the distant horizons unless you build solid ground on which to tread. It was consistent with the priority for our Presidency which I have just described, that we concentrated discussion at the London European Council last week as much on possible on down-to-earth topics leading to actions of direct and practical benefit to our individual citizens.

The European Council launched a new programme for business and jobs; this programme holds the key for making the Community the major force for growth in the 1990s that it was in the 1960s. We agreed that the growth of business and enterprise is essential to tackle the scourge of unemployment particularly long-term and youth unemployment. We therefore agreed first, on more help to the small and medium-scale firms which are so often the engine of economic growth. We agreed on the need for help to set up new small firms and improve their access to new technology. As one way of providing this we welcome the new loan facility agreed by Finance Ministers last month which will be worth 1½ billion ECU and which is specially intended to assist small and medium-sized businesses. We also endorsed in principle the Commission's proposal to increase the VAT threshold and to simplify VAT on small business.

Second, we urged further efforts to free firms from unnecessary burdens, so that they can develop, expand and take on new people. We welcomed the steps which the Commission have introduced to assess the impact of all new Community proposals and regulations on business. Third, we called for the adoption of an action plan for employment growth. We are increasingly following similar economic policies directed to promoting inflation-free growth. That must be the main instrument for creating new jobs. But we agreed that we should take some specific steps to ensure people are given the skills and training they need to get jobs, to help the long-term unemployed back into jobs, to promote self-employment, small firms and cooperatives and to improve the working of the labour market. We also decided to speed up efforts to remove the remaining barriers to trade between Member States. We noted that significant steps had already been taken, including for example, the adoption of an important directive to liberalize certain capital transactions.

Before the Council I had written to all Heads of Government asking them to help us break the deadlock on a package of 13 measures before the Internal Market Council. Im am greatful that they responded positively to that appeal. {APPLAUSE} 

In consequence, nine measures were agreed at that Council and the European Council gave instructions which should result in agreement on all or most of the remainder, including public purchasing and telecommunications equipment. The European Council also called for substantial further progress on transport policy including a Community policy on civil aviation encouraging greater competition between airlines and improved services to their customers. {APPLAUSE} 
Our citizens should be able to travel around Europe as cheaply as American citizens can travel around the United States. {APPLAUSE} 

Lack of progress in the Community has already led some of us to make bilateral arrangements to enable our people to enjoy lower air fares which in turn stimulate more business and more jobs. Finally, the Council recognized that strengthening the open world trading system on the basis of a fair balance of rights and obligations is crucial to achieving more jobs and more growth. We noted that the Community has already initiated action against Japan in the GATT on its barriers to trade. That action may need to be reinforced unless we see early results.

Mr President, 70 years ago Europe had just experienced, on the battlefields of Verdun and the Somme, the bloodiest fighting, the most tragic waste of a generation, that the world has even known. The Second World War was to bring further heartbreak and destruction. Our Community was conceived and constructed to ensure that this experience would never be repeated, to bring about a lasting peace within Western Europe, to replace antagonism with friendship and cooperation, to deepen and broaden Europe's democratic tradition. Today we face a threat to our way of life and to our democratic principles from a new form of attack, more insidious, but no less deadly than those that have shaken Europe for centuries. I refer to terrorism. It has struck indiscriminately at one country after another in the Community. It can strike anywhere. No country is immune. It is vital that we act together in our common defence as we did successfully in the case of Syria. The Council, therefore, agreed on three key principles to guide our battle against terrorism and those who sponsor it. There must be no concessions under duress to terrorists or their sponsors. {SPONTANEOUS-DEMONSTRATION} 

There must be improved police and intelligence cooperation and exchange of information to prevent terrorism and to bring the guilty to justice. Terrorist attacks against any one Member State should be regarded as an attack against all and met with a united response. {APPLAUSE} 

It is vital, in dealing with terrorism, to match our actions to our words. Words come easily. Action may carry a cost. {SPONTANEOUS-DEMONSTRATION} 

That is why I regard our agreement to stand firm in the face of terrorism and to take action against those who perpetrate it as a significant step forward. There must be no question of saying that an act of terrorism in Britain is a problem for Britain alone to deal with, or that terrorism in France is a problem for the French to handle or similarly with Germany or Italy or Spain. Any country or terrorist group that may contemplate terrorism against any Member State of the European Community must now know that it faces the united determination of us all. {APPLAUSE} 

We have therefore agreed on steps to ensure more effective arrangements for extradition, practical cooperation to deal with theft and forgery of passports and intensified cooperation against illegal immigration and against abuse of the right of asylum. Only by strengthening controls at the Community's external frontiers in this way can we safely press ahead with simplifying frontier procedures within the Community. We want free movement for our citizens but not for terrorists or other criminals.

Heads of Government also spent time on three pressing health and social issues—drug abuse, cancer and AIDS. On drugs the European Council agreed on specific measures to be taken in cooperation with the Council of Europe and with other countries involved to attack every link in the drug chain. They include support for producer countries' own efforts to end production of drugs, joint action to thwart illegal trafficking and to bring the guilty to justice, sharing experience in the treatment and rehabilitation of offenders, and coordination of legal action to ensure that the assets of someone convicted of drug trafficking in one country will be liable to confiscation anywhere else in the Community. {APPLAUSE} 

The European Council in The Hague had already put in hand Community action against cancer which kills around 700 000 people in our countries each year. On this occasion we further decided to launch a Cancer Information Year in 1989 to spread knowledge about the prevention, early warning and treatment of the disease. We also considered the disturbing and increasing threat to public health in all our countries from AIDS. Each one of us is taking steps at national level to try to halt its spread. We decided to organize a concerted exchange of information between the Member States so that we can all benefit from each other's knowledge, making sure we learn more about prevention and, I hope, about treatment. We agreed to consider what further cooperative measures, including cooperation in research, might be taken.

As is traditional, Heads of Governments and Foreign Ministers discussed a number of issues in political cooperation. We had a thorough discussion of East-West relations and arms control. Those of us whose countries are members of the NATO Alliance have recently set out our views in the communiqué of the NATO Defence Ministers meeting. We all agreed that East-West relations are not just a matter of arms control. In particular, human rights are an essential factor in building confidence between East and West.

At the Vienna Conference, reviewing compliance with the Helsinki Final Act, we are insisting on a thorough review of how each country has respected its commitments to human rights. In some cases it is a sad story. We know the plight of those in the Soviet Union who argue not to overthrow the system but simply for the implementation of what was agreed in Helsinki. Yuri Orlov has emerged from nine years' imprisonment to tell us himself of his bitter experiences. People like Mr Orlov cannot speak out in the Soviet Union. But the Twelve can speak up for them, and we must do so in Vienna during the coming weeks. {APPLAUSE} 

We also recalled the Soviet Union's shameful occupation of Afghanistan, now reaching the end of its seventh year. We once more called on the Soviet Union to end the agony of the Afghan people, including the four million Afghans who have been forced to flee their country, by a rapid and complete withdrawal of Soviet forces. {APPLAUSE} 

Mr President, within the institutions of the European Community there may be an inclination to see relations with the United States through the prism of commercial disputes. Certainly, they are important, and we must stand up strongly for Europe's interests when they are threatened.

But Europe must also take a wider view. There are new hopes and prospects for reducing nuclear weapons. But we must ensure that they are realized without damage to Europe's security. The shared American-European experience of the war years is moving steadily further into the past. The new generations on both sides of the Atlantic are less influenced by the memory of wartime cooperation. Yet the habit of working together across the Atlantic has never been more necessary than it is now.

Over the past few years we have seen the United States regain its confidence and pride and offer once again strong leadership in defence of our democratic values. We should never fail to give thanks for the outstanding generosity which leads the United States to keep 330 000 servicemen and their families in Europe. {APPLAUSE} 

We must not forget either that anything which weakens America weakens Europe and the whole free world.

My conclusion is that in building the European Community we must not only look inwards to our own institutions and policies but also outwards to building up the Atlantic relationship. And let us never forget that the aftermath of war produced two great ideas which have shaped our destiny ever since. One was the NATO Alliance, the other the European Community. {APPLAUSE} 
Mr President, I shall conclude by quoting some words from a remarkable speech by President von Weizsäcker to both Houses of Parliament in London earlier this year. Speaking of our European Community he said:

‘We have still not fulfilled the expectations, nor have we exhausted our potentialities. But they exist. The Americans urge the Europeans to use their weight and act in cohesion. The people of central and eastern Europe place their hopes in us. The Third World depends on us Europeans meeting our share of the responsibility for their well-being.'
Yet he went to:

‘We still seem to lack the courage of our own convictions. But if we really take our convictions seriously and think of our children's future, why shouldn't that courage come?'
Mr President, it is a mark of how far we have come within Europe that a British Prime Minister should stand before the European Parliament and use the words of a German President. {APPLAUSE}

I would like to see us find that courage, courage to face up not only to the challenges within our societies, such as unemployment, and the challenges to our societies from outside, such as terrorism and drugs, but also the challenge of realizing our common European strength to ensure the further spread of democracy and freedom and justice in the wider world.

I hope that the British Presidency and the London European Council have taken us a further step down that road.
{SUSTAINED APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
