{title} Speech to Conservative Candidates' Conference {/title}
{event} Albany Hotel, Birmingham {/event}
{speaker} Margaret Thatcher {/speaker}
{date} April 25, 1987 {/date}
{source} http://www.margaretthatcher.org/speeches/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Mr Chairman, fellow candidates ... I liked that what you said about the date of a General Election Mr Chairman, because I must tell you it has not yet been decided, it has not yet been decided. I'm very well aware that it's my job and those of my close colleagues to choose the date which gives us the best chance of getting a really big majority, which gives the rest of the world confidence that Conservative Government in Britain is well based, well established and will continue for a very long time... {APPLAUSE} It's easy to decide it but it's damn difficult to do it. That's my task.

What I have to say to you is you have to be ready whenever. When it comes, just think of all the time you've had to get ready for it, so there won't be any excuse if you're not ready. If you haven't thought about your Election address, if you haven't thought about your canvassing, if you haven't thought about what you're going to put across and how you're going to put it across in your own local area, and if you haven't thought about not only the detailed stuff, but how you're going to put across the really broad brush issues upon which General Elections on broad impressions, possibly augmented by a few specific local issues on a few specific things on which they feel strongly. But we have to get across the broad brush message about what exactly this Government has achieved during the last eight years.

But first you've got to fight the local elections, not in London but elsewhere, because everyone's got their eye on the local elections. Everyone's got their eye on how they're fought, everyone's got their eye on which Party is the better organised, because in local elections a lot depends on how many of your people you get out. And everyone knows that after the local elections we shall be having a look at the position, not merely because of the local elections, but because, and I see Ken Clarke is there, you are a candidate Ken aren't you, because ... what are you doing down there? But, on the real broad brush things, I'm sorry now I've lost the threads of it ... and everyone knows you'll be having a look at the position after the local elections.

It's not only after the local elections, but it's because it's about the time of the year when one would have to consider whether one takes it this summer or leaves it until October or leaves over to the following March or leaves it over to the following June. And one is in the position where if you take ... march up to a hurdle and you don't decide to jump it until you're right up to it. There's the moment you decide not to take it you are limiting of course your possible chances in the future. Now it's not an easy decision to take, but Kenneth and I and one or two others will be taking it. And we hope that the results you'll let us have for the local elections will be really very good indeed.

Now can I give you some idea of how we shall fight the election whenever it comes. First we have got to get across the enormous nature of the achievements of the last eight years how they have transformed the whole of Britain, both at home and Britain's standing in the world.

Now, we've some of us have been doing one or two experiments and given literally the list of a whole list of achievements to people who are not really very terribly conscious and who have no idea and they come back and they say this is absolutely terrific. We had no idea … . the achievements in the Health Service, absolutely fantastic ... look at the achievements which Ken Baker has been telling you about and the amount which is that is being spent on education, which is not always given the correct results. And look at the achievements in defence. And look at what we've done for law and order. They look at the achievements in the taxation system. They look pretty, nearly, they look at the achievements on what we've done in financial and banking law. They look at the achievements, yes achievements of the City of London which actually earns net seven and a half billion pounds a year for the whole of the United Kingdom and more than North Sea oil at its peak. And what we've found is that people do not know these achievements. And first ... therefore, is those have to be got across. And you will be receiving not only the details of the achievements, because I hope we're going to have them very much better set out in the section of the manifesto this time as well as the Campaign Guide, so that you've got a much easier reference to them, but we're going to try to select some of the most outstanding ones so that we all concentrate on those and all get those across. So that by the end of the Campaign, people might be absolutely fed up to the back teeth to know that there are 60,000 more nurses and doctors, and we've treated a million more patients every year ... they will know it, they will know it, because we've all been saying it. So point number one are the actual achievements, the new sense of confidence which there really is, and the fact that it has permeated throughout the whole of the British economy and pretty nearly the whole of the British people.

Achievements first, then because we are the positive Party, with the positive approach, we shall take up the theme that we spelled out during the last Party Conference—the Next Moves Forward, on the tremendous basis of achievements, you're in a position to take, not the Next Move Forward, but the Next Moves with a positive approach. Now you will come up against an argument which will run roughly like this: ‘Well, if you're going to do that now, why haven't you done it in the last eight years?' Well, it's a damn silly argument, if I might say so. Just because Marks and Spencer is going to produce new products this year, it's damn silly to say ‘Why haven't you done it all in the last eight years?'. It's because you are a very successful business, a very successful government ... clear principles and, of course, you deal with things and then there's always something else to be dealt with. You tackle one peak, and just when you've got to the height of that one peak, you see another one ahead. But the idea that somehow history comes to an end and doesn't always consist of unfinished business is quite absurd. You can't say to Marks and Spencer's, British Homes Stores, ... Well, you haven't produced those in the last eight years, what in the world are you doing to them now?' That is part of staying on top, by being in tune with the needs and the moments of the time, but identifying those and by always carrying them forward, but never retreating from basic principles. So that argument should not be at all difficult to cope with.

Another argument I wish you to put very, very strongly indeed is not only the achievements on defence, which are enormous and defence will be a very, very great issue. Not only the economic achievements of a million extra jobs and of eight months now of falling unemployment, at the moment it is falling in every region of the United Kingdom, but also how the prospects for most people in the future have been transformed because we stuck to our policy of reducing taxation, of wider spread of property ownership, and a wider dispersal of decision-making powers. Now take those things together. We have to have if you are to produce more wealth, people have to have incentives. If we hadn't cut income tax, if people had said that every time they put in extra effort, they got a bigger proportion of money taken away ... from tax, you do not get the incentive, you do not get the growth, you do not get the goose that lays the golden eggs, therefore, you haven't got any eggs to distribute. And the fact that we have cut income tax and will go on cutting it, really is a matter of two things. First we believe that progress is made because people rightly work for the improvement of their own families. And that is a laudable thing to work for. They work for that. The fact therefore they get a bigger incentive, therefore, you get bigger growth and they get a bigger proportion of their own money to spend.

Don't be ashamed of that at all. Because what the Labour Party are saying is that look, take a nurse. You've given her an increase in pay that been considerable, we are now, we the Labour Party are going to take and give it with one hand and take it away with the other, by putting on higher taxation. You give teachers higher pay, now they're going to give it with one hand and take it away with another. The man who works in the factory on average male manual wages £203 a week, spends £61 a week in tax. We, the Labour Party, are saying he's not paying enough in tax. He's saying please look at my net take-home pay, that's all I've got left. Now look, it is a highly laudable thing for people to want to work to give their families a better home a better chance in life, to see the wonders of the world which they never saw, to be able to save to give the kids a start in a Building Society account so they've got a deposit when it comes to purchasing their own homes, and if every family did it we should have a responsible society of the kind which we want to see and there'd be fewer people needing help and at the same time more resources to do it … . On the defensive about reducing tax.

There's another philosophical reason. I sometimes say to our people, when they say, ‘Oh, you want more public expenditure.' I said are you going to go to your constituents and say, ‘you know that tax relief you were going to get, I'm your Member of Parliament and spent it, because, I reckon, I your Member of Parliament or your Candidate know better how to spend your earnings than you do. Don't you think I'm a good guy!'

What sort of country do you think it would be, where the people beg the Government to take more of their own earnings in taxation. And I will tell you something. They don't. They don't. Otherwise we shouldn't get everyone saying ‘Look at our net take-home pay, we want more'. So never be on the defensive about that. It is part of our fundamental belief that everyone will pay a fair whack of tax. But we do not believe in a free society that the Government is so arrogant as to say to people ‘You are free and we are free. But you're not good enough to know how to spend the lion's share of your own money, but we are good enough to know, not only how to spend what is right and proper and due and should be paid to Government, but we are free and good enough to spend your money for you'.

So don't ever be on the defensive over that. Because in the end you get a responsible society by getting a society of responsible people. That is the people of property owners, not stopping with houses, but savings, and if you're encouraging people to save you've a bounden duty to see you don't have inflation because inflation is the most ... you save that and I'll {COMMENT="Word missing"} the numerical value but I'll take a large chunk of the real value by the only way of getting taxation through the House of Commons without a Finance Bill: it's known as printing money called inflation. So if you are asking people to save, you have a bounden duty in practice not to have inflation. And, if you look, you have got a bigger dispersal, a wider dispersement of property under this Government so that everyone who, as they come up after another fifteen years of Tory Government, that come up to retirement, they'll have the value of their house, which will be considerable and it will be mortgage free, they'll have the value of their pension and everyone will have a second pension, because that's the way we've been arranging it for a long time. They'll have the ... of their Building Society or some of their gilt-edged securities or National Savings, so it will have kept their value and there are eight million people who now have shares. Don't you see what a transformation it is? When Great Grandma dies, the money, everybody will have expectations. And what used to be the privileges of the few, under Conservatives will become the expectations and the necessities of the many.

That's what capitalism is. That's what a free society is. That's what free enterprise is, it only succeeds by pleasing the masses of people, by having a higher standard of living. But then you'll find people coming to retirement owning very considerable amounts of property and money. It is very different, and let me say this to you. You hear about demise. This to me is the one way to make one nation. One nation, so that property isn't something you have in the Forsyte Saga on Sunday nights or used to on television ... It's what you have in your own family. And with it will come responsibility. And we've done it. And we're going to go on doing it. And there's going to be more privatisation. Two reasons, first they get wider dispersal of property, but secondly, I'll tell you something about Governments, they're not very good at running business, and if they were they'd be in there doing it.

And you see again, many, many companies that have now been de-nationalised, sometimes a better word than privatise, and all of a sudden people in it have got shares and they've had preference in getting shares, have a new incentive, a new effort. Governments ought not to be in that sort of business, they ought to leave it to the people who are able to run the business. It's our task to set the framework of law. Never say this Government is laissez faire, we're not. We set the framework of law to ... keep competition so there aren't any cosy arrangements about cartels between manufacturers, to see that you keep competition. Now do you see, this is the way ... see it and it's best between the United States and the Soviet Union. This is the way you get a thriving prosperous society and a free society.

You've got the Soviet Union highly discontented with its system, so it should be, it's awful. But what it is trembling command economy of the government's saying you have no right to ... those of the government gives you, they tell you what to produce, they tell you which jobs you can have, which jobs you can't, you don't do any better if you work hard than if you don't. So in the end you have neither freedom nor dignity, nor prosperity. You get in our system a freedom under a rule of law, because it's the rule of law which makes freedom work, otherwise the strong would take it out on the weak. Freedom under a rule of law. So you get the initiative, you get the free discussion, you get ... to start up on your own and gives you freedom, dignity, and prosperity. An interesting thing in the world over, there is stirrings of freedom ... it is command economies without any possible alternative, realise that it's not satisfying for people over whom they govern. So, they say to us sometimes, well, you've got the best stories, you've got the best tunes, I said well look ... if you didn't have Communism you'd be a jolly prosperous society. But you realise, it is this fundamental belief we've had for years that, yes, you will have people who will go against the law. Yes, you will have people who will sit back and expect others to help them. But just because 10 per cent don't play the game is no reason for taking freedom away from 90 per cent of the people. It is the better able to cope with the 10 per cent ... less than 10 per cent ... because there's always been crime, because power to do good is I'm afraid power to do evil and some people take it that way.

Now that is the creed, and it is a fantastic creed. We have to turn it round, because it's getting more, and more and more Socialist. More and more. And the British people, without one characteristic about Britain, would have said "It's a free society," we're saying, "No, it isn't. There's incomes control, prices control, dividend control, exchange control, industrial development ... and what's more we're governed by the bosses of the trade unions and not by the Government.' And they didn't like it. So we had to set free our faith, we had to get rid of those controls. We had to get more property to the people and have to get more power to the people by privatisation. We had to take power away from the big, arrogant bosses of the trade union movement and give it to the ordinary decent, hard working members. The faith is the same the whole time. In our country like this, the great thing is the British character. The British character is that the overwhelming majority are decent and hard working and you give the power to them and you will gradually overcome the other problems. You will say, where does that leave Government? I will tell you. If a Government gets too much involved in the other things, it doesn't do the job it's meant to do. And the job it's meant to do this. First, to see that that ...

... Conventional weapons have never been enough to stop conventional wars. We shouldn't have had World War One or World War Two, if they had been. A third conventional War, that would be more terrible than any of the others. If it started, even if there were no nuclear weapons at the time and I would never completely give up ours, just supposing other people had their way, the race would be on as to who got it first and because I must tell you in the last War ... had Hitler got it first we shouldn't be here talking now … . And that is why nuclear weapons are so important, you can never have disinventions but you can disinvent dynamite. They are so horrific that there can be no victor. And I believe ... We never give up the nuclear weapon unless you've got something else that is more sure, and always remember that we're a small country having to stand up to a big potential aggressor where nuclear weapon is the only thing that equalises your deterrent capacity.

So the country knows that we are sure of defence and that is something only Government can be, they have to be strong to do it. And we are. Don't underestimate the effect of defence in the next Election. Most people want to be proud of Britain and to have a strong Britain. And right now they can be, and it's strong. The second ... of Government. Yes, it is to do everything you can to keep law and order, ... everything you can because law and order is a joint venture on the part of Government and people. We've got to uphold the police. We have. We've got to increase the numbers of police. We have … . got to pay them according to the risks they undertake. We have. You've got see that they have the right amount of equipment. They have. And you've got to be a bit more ... work to them and not interfere. Because they ... the law, they do not serve a political party. And then you've got to say to people, there's no way in which you can have a bobby on the beat at every street, at every minute, every hour of the day. Yes, you have a duty to do as much for crime prevention for your own house. To see that the locks are all right, the hinges are all right, the windows closed and have Neighbourhood Watches. You have a duty to co-operate with the police if you see something suspicious and let people know. You have a duty to lock your car, you have a duty not to leave things in ... temptation. This is what we have to do, we have to support the police, and this Government has not only done that, it's seeing that the Courts have the sentences which they need and we're strengthening the sentences now in the Criminal Justice Act, Criminal Justice Bill. So that's the second purpose, and again it wouldn't have happened but for us and the crime position would be infinitely worse now than it is. And when people say it's all due to unemployment, may I point out that crime in the United States is good deal worse than here? It's got more to do with people's attitudes. And with structure of what is acceptable in society and what is not, than it has to do with unemployment.

The third thing: Government has got in fact to seek that the finances of the nation are well run and sound improvement. Everyone knows that so long as this Government is in power, that will be so. They're taking it for granted ... And the fourth thing is our fundamental belief in a property owning democracy.But it's also this, that when by your economic policy you've got the engines of growth going, it is to see that those who genuinely need help receive it, and receive it generously. I say genuinely need help. That is why our record on the Health Service is far better. First because we create the wealth, then we do a fair distribution. And then we have a very good safety net throughout society for those, in fact, who are genuinely unfortunate or who are old and were old at the time before everyone had a very big basic pension, and so we set out to help those. And although we've one million more pensioners now, we have in fact honoured our pledge to keep in ... more than abreast with inflation.

And then to set a framework within which your industry and your commerce can work and then in fact you make certain that Britain's voice is heard in the world. You have to be strong to do all those things, like a parent in the way you've got to be strong enough to let your child … . the people have the responsibilities which their fundamental human right entitles them to. Now this Government has therefore been a very, very strong Government and will continue. He said I wasn't going to talk long. I want you to get the ... embedded into the belief. Now what will be ... income tax will be one, don't run away from it. Unemployment will be another. But it's nothing like as bad as it was as an issue. Because of the fantastic number of things David Young and Ken Clarke have done in training, retraining—we've still got jobs which are vacant because we haven't enough skills to fill them. And don't forget the new Job Training Schemes come on this month.

The Labour Party says it's fiddling the figures and then say they're going to do the same thing. We've spent £10 billion on special measures since 1979. But jobs come from a thriving business. The Labour Party can't stand private sector business ... inner cities. And when Labour has been in power in the inner cities, there you have poverty and there you chase the private sector away and there you have many bad schools. It's they who want to keep it that way—it's we who want to get ... those are the issues.

Housing—there's a great deal more to be done spreading ownership more widely, and a good deal to be done in the inner cities and a great deal to be done when we get back. If we hadn't introduced the Rates Bill, if we have an Election this autumn before the rates go in the next Session of Parliament ... it will get through in the House, because ... is concerned, this sitting. And then education, Kenneth told you, will be one of the really major big things. There will be certain more trade union reform, and quite a lot of other things. In fact it will be the most radical fundamental manifesto, that any Government in its third term, that you've ever seen.

... a lot more to be done. We're not running out of steam. We're just getting up steam. And I hope you're feeling the ... 

{/speech}
