{title} Speech to Young Conservative Conference {/title}
{event} Harrogate {/event}
{speaker} Margaret Thatcher {/speaker}
{date} February 12, 1978 {/date}
{source} http://www.margaretthatcher.org/speeches/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Disraeli reminded us that in a progressive country change is constant. What I find so refreshing about today's political debate is how it has swung away from the smug assumption that change is bound to be towards the Socialist, corporatist, collectivist way of doing things.

The Socialists are out of touch to think that "progress" means taking banks and insurance companies, the construction industry, transport operators, and firms up and down the country, out of private and into state hands; as Labour's Programme for Britain proposes.

—that "progress" means giving Trade Union leaders still more power over the lives of working men and women.

—that it is "progress" for the State to interfere still further in our daily lives, telling us how to work, how to live and how to spend our money.

These smug assumptions of the 1960s are simply not relevant to the needs of the 1980s. After ten of the last fourteen years under a Labour Government the country is crying out to be spared further radical Socialist reforms. The Socialists are out of date and out of touch, and are rapidly running out of time.

Of course, that is not the way Labour will be presenting things to the electorate. We must beware of Smokescreen Socialism, of the cloud of excuses, explanations and justifications, which billow from Labour spokesmen whether they are sitting on the Government Front Bench—or sitting on their hands in the voting lobbies trying to stop Parliament reaching awkward votes.

It is the smokescreen experts in the Government who want to cover up the truly appalling unemployment prospect. Even if Mr Healey's job forecasts were right—and when was a Healey forecast ever right?—we would still have more than a million unemployed in 1980.

It is the Labour smokescreen manufacturers who want to cover up their failed industrial strategy with its stagnant output and productivity—both among the worst in the industrial world.

It is the smokescreen crowd who cry ‘union bashing' whenever an intelligent critique of the future role of trade unions is set out; or when attention is drawn to practices such as violent picketing or victimisation which most trade unionists abhor. 

And it's the smokescreen people who come out in force shouting "racist" when we bring the immigration problem into the open and we try, despite the efforts of the rabble-rousers, to discuss in a reasonable way the genuine fears and concerns of many of our citizens.

Let us tell those shouters, we're not going to have our deep and passionate commitment to racial equality smothered by the orchestrated clamour of the Labour Left. 

Their clamour cannot conceal what I have repeatedly said. Under our Conservative philosophy, all men are equal under the Law; whatever their colour, whatever their religion. And all are equally important; and they must have the opportunity to fulfil their own destinies, free to live their own lives.

But the shouts of the left cannot drown the voices of anxiety. We have to remove uncertainty where we can. Racial harmony in Great Britain will benefit most if some of the doubts about the future are removed: doubts on numbers and doubts on commitments.

I believe we shall only succeed in maintaining and securing our traditional tolerance and fairness in this country if we cut the number of immigrants coming in now. For the future, I have repeated the pledges given by Mr Whitelaw at our 1976 Party Conference, which are well known.

Now that the subject is being discussed, loopholes will be closed, and numbers will begin to fall.

But we also have to remove doubts about our commitments. The Conservative Party, which has done so much for our immigrant community, will honour in full our legal commitments to United Kingdom passport holders in East Africa and to the immediate dependants of all those who were settled here as of right before 1973. We will honour those commitments. {APPLAUSE}

Those smokescreen makers have tried to distract attention from the real world: the world where our city centres decay, homelessness increases and jobs are hard to find.

Oh, we shall have much to put right at the end of socialist days, but we shall do it and we shall set about it with a will. {APPLAUSE}

Now it's also these same smokescreen politicians who want us to forget the frequent occasions when this Labour Government oversteps its powers and has to be restraint by the courts. You'll remember Skytrain and Freddie Laker, TV licences, Tameside.

And now it's they who are trying to blacklist and blackmail firms and their work-forces into submitting to their so-called voluntary pay policy. Their action is arbitrary and unjust. {AUDIENCE} Hear, hear! {/AUDIENCE} {APPLAUSE} 

And it is they who, only this week, have been accused by a Select Committee of the House of Commons of showing a "cynical disregard for the rights of the subject".

Above all, it is the main Labour aim to draw a gigantic smokescreen across the Labour Party's real policies and real intentions for the future, to keep from the people Labour's plans, already worked out in detail, to build the collectivist state and to bury free enterprise.

Yet it is not a socialist or a collectivist society towards which today's younger generation look. They do not wish to be dragooned.

On the contrary, they seek a world in which people and families can act more for themselves, own their own homes, spend or save more of their earnings as they choose, run their own business without harassment, select their own ways of helping themselves and their neighbours.

They want a world in which the state looms less large, in which power, property and authority are well dispersed, not concentrated in state and party political hands.

And, of course, there is one vital area in which people are looking with increasing anxiety to Government to give a lead. They expect Government to provide a firm framework of justice, law and public order in which physical security can be assured, property respected, and free choice exercised.

Yet the irony is, Mr. Chairman, that while we've got a state that's only too ready to interfere with every economic detail of our lives—that is, setting prices, fixing wages, sometimes, as we've seen this week, without bothering to check whether their methods of interference are lawful—it is failing to fulfil one of the most basic functions of government, that is, to protect people from criminal violence and to see the law upheld. {AUDIENCE} Hear, hear! {/AUDIENCE} {APPLAUSE} 

On the contrary, the country is now in the grip of the steepest rate of increase in crime this century. The police are understaffed and overloaded. London has a police force scarcely bigger than twenty years ago. Yet detected crime has quadrupled in the last twenty years.

Experienced police officers are leaving the force at a worrying rate. Yet the Home Secretary tells Parliament that "we are doing very well"!

Meanwhile the prisons are full to bursting; vandalism is growing; in some areas people are afraid to answer their doors at night.

Nor should we be surprised that respect for the law is dissolving. When the philosophy prevails that the state is responsible for just about everything, the way is open for a society in which the individual feels responsible for nothing.

The "State" view dominates—a dubious and uncertain quantity, as we have seen—a standard which varies from time to time depending on what suits the politician best, or on whom they regard as their friends and who their enemies.

A Government which is going to protect people and property must be committed to law and lawful behaviour from its very roots.

But Labour Ministers have put politics before the law. They have attacked the judiciary. They confronted the police on the Grunwick picket line. Whilst the insidious gospel is put about that defiance of the law for political ends is no crime.

And all this is done in the name of "Socialist Progress".

One thing is clear. We must never again allow power to become so dangerously centralised and politicised in our society as it is now.

That is why as Conservatives we stand for a strong Parliament as a proper check on the Executive. We stand for a strong and independent judiciary. The day that the judicial system comes under party political control, as some of the Left would like, that is the end of the free society.

That is why we stand for personal and independent ownership against state ownership. It is a bad omen when we see the share of wealth held by the people falling as the share held by the state rises. This is what the most recent figures show.

Ownership which is widely dispersed is the best bulwark of all against coercive power. Our forefathers knew this and Conservative policies in modern times have long recognised it.

Through measures to encourage home ownership and more personal saving, Conservative Governments have helped to spread wealth on a wide scale to people who like most of us started with nothing. We want to make a property-owning democracy a reality.

The policies we have been setting out in recent months reinforce our commitment in these crucial areas.

There are our policies for tax reform and tax reduction, especially the reduction of tax on earnings and savings.

There are our policies to further the sale of council houses to tenants.

There are our policies to encourage savings out of earnings, so that everyone can build up a bit of capital of his own and enjoy the independence it brings.

There are our policies to promote small businesses, and still more businesses; for they are the hope and source of tomorrow's jobs and careers.

There are our policies to reduce time-wasting bureaucracy and form-filling.

There are our policies for agriculture which will ensure that independent-minded farmers and their families stay in business.

There is our determination to preserve a free press against the spread of a closed shop.

There is our instinctive belief in the importance of free and responsible collective bargaining—vital if the decisions on who shall be paid how much are not to be taken by the politicians and their advisers with their pocket calculators.

—vital if the main purpose of Trades Unions is not to be extinguished.

We are the party of freedom. But we are also the party of order. Our police must be strengthened and our magistrates given back adequate powers to deal effectively with young offenders.

We are realists and we know full well the strength of the forces against us in a complex modern society—the people who will always have a reason for state intervention, for fixing this man's wage, for regulating that firm's price, for laying down who should be employed and how and where.

But we are also idealists, and I know that with the people behind us we can overcome these pressures and head towards a world which is both freer and safer for young people, their children and their children's children.

Socialism in Britain is not the wave of the future. It is the flotsam of the past.

The long night of collectivism must soon come to an end. The time has arrived to move on to a new common ground: where people matter, where effort pays, where responsibility is freely exercised, and the power of the state firmly contained.

For you who own tomorrow, that is the choice today. 

{/speech}
