{title} Speech to European Parliament {/title}
{event} European Parliament, Strasbourg {/event}
{speaker} Margaret Thatcher {/speaker}
{date} December 9, 1986 {/date}
{source} http://www.margaretthatcher.org/speeches/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Mr President, may I say how grateful I am to colleagues for their comments about the incident which accurred at the beginning and also how grateful I am to so many for taking part in the debate which I have greatly enjoyed. You wouldn't expect me to agree with all of the things which have been said. I have been accused, among other things, of irrelevance. I find that that accusation mostly comes from people who show some tendency to suffer from the disease themselves.

{APPLAUSE} 

May I make it clear that I came here today to report to you as President-in-Office of the Council of Ministers, not on the policies of Her Majesty's Government, but on the action which the European Council has taken in the interests of the Community as a whole. It is as President-in-Office of the Council, conscious of my responsibility to all Members of this Parliament, that I have to reply to the debate. In the European Council each of us brings to the meeting table our profoundly held political convictions. But we also bring to the negotiating table a determination to achieve results for the citizens of the Community as a whole. Whatever has been said from whatever quarter of this Chamber, may I remind honourable Members that the final communiqué was agreed to by all Heads of Government whatever their political opinion. I hope colleagues will bear that in mind.

{APPLAUSE} 

The particular quarter from which the applause came reminds me to say how very grateful I am to Sir Henry Plumb for the excellent leadership he gives to our group in this Parliament.

May I also say to many other people who have spoken how very much I agree with those who say we shall only get a successful Community on the basis of sound economic policies and the convergence of those policies, which means low inflation. If everyone goes back to printing money, one will soon be back to far higher unemployment, even higher than we have now. {APPLAUSE} 

Inflation is the enemy of jobs and therefore, it is vital that we keep inflation down. Sound financial policies were very much a part of this communiqué.

That brings me to some hard-hitting things which were said right at the beginning by Mr Delors about the gap between ends and means. With respect, I wish he had said some of these things in London. I did invite him to do so while he was sitting at the press conference with me. He was singularly quiet.

We could have had a much more interesting comment then, but he said it today.

May I make this point: in 1984 we agreed to raise the VAT ceiling in the Community. I justified that increase in the British Parliament, as others did in their Parliaments, on the grounds that the Community needed more funds to cope with enlargement and to allow more resources for new policies. Mr Delors has told us today that those new policies are being thwarted because too much of our resources are still being pre-empted by one policy alone; a necessary policy, but one which has to be adapted to today's needs, to a Community in which 90%; of the people are not engaged in agriculture. One has been very concerned and one's confidence in the procedures of financial discipline is very shaken when we hear from some quarters that Community finances are characterized by disastrous overspending. Yet at the same time as that comment is made, more money is requested. We cannot do both.

Mr Bar&oacu;n Crespo, like President Delors, stressed that more needs to be done and the European Parliament has suggested funds for destocking agricultural surpluses. We all want to get rid of the surpluses, but you cannot drain the tank when the tap is still turned full on. You have to do both of the things necessary at the same time. You cannot spend money on student exchanges if you have already spent it on feeding surplus milk to calves. You can't spend more on research and development if you have already spent it on subsidized sales to the Soviet Union unless you totally and utterly reject financial discipline and put an ever deeper and ever bigger hand into the taxpayer's pocket.

Yes, I believe in financial discipline! If you want more money it has to be approved by each Parliament in this Community. We happen, in spite of what some colleagues have said, to belong to those three Member States of the Community which make net contributions to the Community. Nine don't. Nine take it out in net benefits. Germany, ourselves and now France make net contributions to the Community. We put up our net contributions through the VAT for enlargement and for new policies. We now understand that too much is going on one particular thing, namely, surpluses. That has to be dealt with so that monies can be released from that in order to do the other things. Yes, I want to see more being done on research and development. Yes, I want to see more being done on structural funds, but I do not believe you can do it—if you want to adhere to financial discipline—by just asking more over and above that which is at present enshrined in the Treaty.

So when Mr Delors produces his report I shall look at it with the greatest possible interest because he is coming round to our capitals and we did insist in the discussion we had that he should set out options and the consequences of options. We shall look at those options very carefully. The first occasion on which Heads of Government may raise the VAT—not will, may—is 1 January 1988. Let me make it clear to this Parliament that I am responsible also to my own Parliament and they are very anxious about what will happen then and are already cross-examining me very closely. So we shall look very carefully at the proposals for real lasting reform.

Neither the Commission nor colleagues here will find that Britain shies away from taking difficult decisions on agricultural surpluses. We didn't shy away from this communiqué. We wanted to put something more in on agriculture, particularly as there is a specialist Agriculture Council going on now. We would have preferred to urge them to reach the relevant conclusions on milk and beef. That did not find favour with some other colleagues. This is what happens in the European Council. You can't all of you get your own way. You have to compromise. That idea did not find favour with other European colleagues. I agree, the communiqué was singularly deficient on the problem of agriculture because not all nations are prepared to face it yet, although all know it must be faced. I am as conscious as the Commission is and, I imagine, so are honourable Members here, that unless it is faced within the coming months, the money will run out towards the end of next year. I would say I regard it as irresponsible to take decisions on agriculture for the coming year knowing that the funds may not be there to meet them.

So as far as Britain is concerned, one will find cooperation in tackling all of these problems as one has found cooperation in the Agriculture Council in the past and found cooperation in getting a sound basis for the finances of the Community. But I think we would do ourselves a disservice if we thought for a moment that everything in the Community demanded more money. There are many things that do not demand money, but demand willpower,

{APPLAUSE} 
which is not always forthcoming in each and every nation. We have in fact during this presidency managed to get 32 internal market measures agreed or adopted: the most ever registered in a single presidency. People say it has been irrelevant. How strange! It includes valuable agreements which will help to liberate capital markets, combat counterfeit goods—absolutely vital to Europe's industries—protect consumers from chemicals in meat, establish standards for direct broadcasting by satellite and set new standards for hotel fire safety which will benefit tourists, and so on. We also were very anxious that we should take decisions which would help digital cellular radio. That is something where Europe has the basic research. We have the know-how, we have an enormous potential market. We are not talking about an old industry ready to fall victim to inefficient technology, we are talking about a new industry which it is up to us to exploit. It is more a matter of willpower than of cash—the will to create a common standard throughout Europe. That is what we have been trying to do. That is what we must continue to do if we are to get the internal market which was after all an objective of the original Treaty of Rome. So yes, we have to deal with cash, yes, we have to deal with the common agricultural policy, we have to deal with the internal market which is not so much a matter of cash as a matter of willpower.

Now colleagues have mentioned many other things. Some have mentioned the European Monetary System. Again may I say this: I believe it would help enormously if all those who belong to the exchange rate mechanism had what Britain has, freedom of capital movement. Never accuse us of not being communautaire. You will find we are leading in many things now—freedom of capital movement, absence of foreign exchange controls and similar monetary systems, that would make it very much easier for an exchange rate mechanism to work rather better than it does now. I hope one day that we shall be able to come it. That is my objective, but don't forget we have done many more things to make a better exchange rate mechanism possible than some other countries in the Community.

I would indeed have liked more things in the communiqué, for example about the internal market. On things like air fares it did not go far enough. It was other governments which prevented this. I would have liked more in about the abolition of quotas for lorries, also an internal market mechanism. It was other countries which prevented this. I would have liked to have reported that more countries had ratified the Single European Act. I was not able to do so. We were among the first to do it. But I was not able to and that is because European Councils are negotiating tables of people who have to reconcile differing interests, and we all have to reach some compromise and we do so. We all have to face difficult problems and I am the first to say that not all countries are actually facing them.

There has been a great deal said about matters like terrorism and drugs, and I think pretty nearly all the things that we did have really been very widely welcomed from all parts of this Chamber. It has been suggested that we did not discuss the Middle East, Central America, South Africa. We discussed some of these matters and the Foreign Ministers discussed others. There was a discussion on South Africa. There is nothing further to report on that from the position which we took up at The Hague.

We are very anxious that there is no progress being made in the Arab/Israel position in the Middle East. We are all very conscious of that fact, it does not augur well, and we are all very anxious that there should be some fresh impetus and fresh progress from the beginning of next year. The problems are the same: to define which Palestinians shall negotiate, because to many of us the PLO would not be acceptable, and to define those countries which would provide a kind of international background for the negotiations to take place.

Central America, I understand, was discussed by the Foreign Ministers. Doubtless there were different viewpoints as there were in the UN Assembly itself when we were one of the 47 countries who abstained on the motion before the assembly on Nicaragua.

There have been comments about the twin pillars of the alliance. To me it is important that both should be strong. If you are going to have a bridge you have got to have two strong pillars to hold it up. And I must be absolutely frank: I am always very, very disturbed at any signs of anti-Americanism I find anywhere.

{SPONTANEOUS-DEMONSTRATION} 

Yes, it is easy to speak in favour of peace. It is also easy to undermine that very peace which we all need for our future. Any suggestion of anti-Americanism, I think, is very, very ill-founded when they have 330 000 troops on the frontier of freedom which goes across our continent and their families are here as well.

{SPONTANEOUS-DEMONSTRATION} 

Mr President, you will be giving me the time limit very soon.

I do not believe that we should under-estimate the achievements of the last six months. There have been enormous achievements both on the internal market, on the practicalities with which we are trying to create real jobs, by which we are trying to help those who are unemployed, whether long-term unemployed or youth unemployed, and many ministers from other countries come to Britain to see what we are doing now about long-term unemployed and helping them back into work and what we are doing with our two-year youth training scheme which is excellent and helping many young people to acquire skills they would never otherwise have had.

We are also trying to do a good deal to help small businesses start up. I for one was very sad that we could not, having had it discussed at two European Councils, be more explicit about the VAT proposals which the Commission has put forward, which raises the VAT threshold on turnover at the option of each country to £ 25 000, and also simplifies the VAT returns for small businesses who have a turnover up to about £ 110 000—all practical measures which we were trying to push ahead but other countries do not find themselves able fully to accept that yet.

If you read the conclusions of the London European Council, you will see there is a list of steps which are practical, which are realistic, which are sound. All things which one needs if we are to achieve the unity of the people of Europe which the Treaty of Rome envisaged.

Finally, Mr President, may I thank you for offering me this opportunity to reply. It seems to me that some people do not like me to reply quite as vigorously as they attack me. It is a reciprocal business with us, I hope it is with you.

{LAUGHTER}

May I make it absolutely clear that Britain is fully communautaire and that in many cases she is leading the pack and will continue to lead the pack in facing the real problems. And I shall be just as realistic and frank about who isn't as I have been today.

{SUSTAINED APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
