{title} Remarks at African American History Month Celebration {/title}
{event} Dean Acheson Auditorium, Washington, DC {/event}
{speaker} Romeo Crennel {/speaker}
{date} February 18, 2005 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Good afternoon. I am really pleased that you were able to stay and turn out for this affair. The panel is a really great panel. Dr. Davis, Dr. Rice, Dr. LaFayette, Dr. Height. I don't know how I got here, to tell you the truth, you know. {LAUGHTER} Coach Crennel. I guess I'm a doctor of football or something like that. {LAUGHTER}

Now, Dr. Lafayette, he was so gracious to agree to give me two minutes of his time, and then he took it all back, you know. {LAUGHTER} So what I'm going to try to do is I'm going to try to be somewhat brief and kind of tell you a little bit about me and a little bit about my journey to get to this point.

Super Bowls, I've been to a few, won a few, and as I've gone along I've started off down at the bottom of the totem pole. And so I was a special teams coach and got a Super Bowl there. I was a Defensive Line Coach, got a Super Bowl there, then got a couple as Defensive Coordinator. So now I'm looking to try to get a Super Bowl as a Head Coach.

I know that members of this distinguished panel here, the work that they did back in the '60s during the Freedom March, that allowed me to be able to stand here today before you. And I think that young people as we go through this life, and we as parents, we need to teach our young people our history and tell them what has happened. Because I have three daughters myself and they don't know, even though I tried to talk to them and tell them, every time I tell them they don't believe it. They said, "Oh, Dad, that was in the olden days." All right? {LAUGHTER}

But as a result of the olden days, we are here today, and so I think we need to tell them that. And sometimes, you know, this family that we talk about which we need to grow with and that helps us grow - and my family has been a big part of me and my being here -- it's with that family in today's environment what's happening is there's a TV in the bedroom and there's a TV in the living room and there's a TV in the other bedroom, and then the kids begin to go off in different directions. All right? And they're on their own, maybe a little too much, and so I think we need to try to get that family back together.

And you young people as you grow, all right, try to keep those families together. I know in this Information Age there's a lot of information out there and there's a lot of temptation for young people, but we need to stay on top of them. They are looking for direction and they want and need direction. So go ahead and give that to them.

And as I go through and I think about my mom and my dad, emphasizing education. And education had a lot to do with me being here because Dad, he always wanted to make sure that you got your homework done. All right? So, kids, you always have to do that homework. So, then Mom, she was there to kind of supervise, and Mom, she would tell Dad if we didn't do the homework, and then when we got home, you know, then, boom, he was the enforcer. {LAUGHTER}

Not only did he tell us to do the homework and then enforce, but my father didn't finish high school. All right? He kind of got in a little trouble in where he was and he ended up going into the army. And the army gave him some structure, but he was always looking to learn. So when we were doing homework, my dad, he was also doing homework because he is somewhat of a jack-of-all-trades and whatever thing that he wanted to do or try to do, he would get books. All right? Whether it was air conditioning or whether it was automobile mechanic work, whether it was brick-laying, he would get a book and he would read and he would be reading as we were reading and doing homework. All right? And so that was a good inspiration for us and to let us know that education was important.

So I think that as we go forward today and you young people understand that education is important and it'll open up some doors for you to give you a chance to get where you want to be in this life. The other thing is I think education opens up doors and gives you opportunity, and that's one of the big things about the Civil Rights struggle is the opportunity. You know, we as people, as human beings, like you say, we're not perfect. But the thing that we want to feel like as black Americans is that we can have an opportunity, an equal opportunity. And I think that was Dr. King's vision, all right, as he went through with the nonviolence. He wanted everybody to have an equal opportunity. You don't have to give me anything, all right, but just give me that opportunity, the same opportunity that you give everybody else, and then leave it up to me then. All right? And I feel like I've got enough confidence in myself and my ability that I can get the job done.

And so you also, young people, have that same challenge. All right? We're going to try to give you the opportunity and you take advantage of it. And the way you take advantage of it is through that education because it's really important. And as you go along, everything is not going to be smooth. You'll find that out in this life. All right? There are some potholes in the road and experience is the thing that can help you get around those potholes.

But when you're young, you're not very experienced and so sometimes you're going to hit that pothole, all right, and you're going to have a down period. But the challenge is not to stay down. The challenge is to come up, rise up, stand up, all right, and then go forward because there's more to life than just that one pothole that you encounter, just that one negative experience that you encounter. So keep moving forward. All right? Keep that positive attitude and keep going because there is something at the end of that rainbow. You know that rainbow that's in the sky? You see it and it seems like it just goes and goes, but at the end of that rainbow they always say that there's a pot of gold. All right? And if you quit and you never try to get to that end of the rainbow, you'll never find that pot of gold. So always strive to keep and give yourself the best chance.

And as we go through, education has allowed me to be here because education gave me my first job. I graduated from college and I could have gone to work right away coaching in high school, but I had a chance to be a graduate assistant so I decided at that point I wanted to be the graduate assistant to further my education and get my Master's. And by getting my Master's, by being there at Western Kentucky, they had an opening on the staff and I started coaching. And so I did a pretty decent job and after a few years I got a chance to move from Western, which was Division II, up to Division I at Texas Tech. All right? So always working to strive forward.

And I think that as you young people move forward and set goals, try to set your goals a little higher. All right? Don't accept mediocrity. Always reach higher. All right? And now by reaching higher you're going to encounter some of those potholes because you're going to get denied, they're going to tell you no. All right? But you have to be persistent and keep calling, keep sending your resume, keep putting yourself out there, because by your persistence that gives you the chance. And by my fact that here, I'm 57 years old, probably the oldest first-time coach in the NFL, all right, by being persistent and by staying after it, by doing my job to a high quality. Somebody recognized that I might be able to get the job done.

And by having the head coaching job, I feel good about that; but I'm not satisfied with just the job. I want to be successful at the job because I know this: I know that if I'm successful it will open up some doors for some of you people, some of you people somewhere down the road. And so the better I do, the better you're going to do and the better we as a nation will do. And if we will remember that, all right, that that equality, that equal opportunity for everybody, for each individual, all right, it's really important for self-esteem, all right, for our outlook on life. If we will remember that and keep that in focus, the forefront, then this world will be a better place because of it, will be a better place.

So I want to tell you young people particularly as you go forward that education is important, so work on your education. Get that done. All right? Do that homework. Read the books. Go to the library. All right? Those things will help you. All right? And then, like I say, don't accept mediocrity. Always strive for the next limb. All right? That higher rung on the ladder. You have to get that one done. And then if you'll do that, then you'll have a chance to be successful. You know, there's an old adage about success. All right? They talk about success is when preparation meets opportunity. All right? So preparation, that's your education, that's your dedication, that's your hard work. But if you get all of those things in line and then the opportunity comes along, then you can be successful. All right? So that's what it takes, that opportunity and that preparation, and you'll have a chance to be successful.

So I leave with you today, all right, from hearing from all of these distinguished members up here, and the messages have been great. And personally, Dr. LaFayette, he could have taken all of my time because I could sit here all night and listen to our history because these people have lived it and so it's really important. But remember that education. All right? Be prepared and be ready to go when that opportunity comes along so that you can be successful.

Thank you. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
