{title} Clinton Global Initiative Workshop Summation and Action Plan Plenary {/title}
{event} New York, NY {/event}
{speaker} Robert Malley {/speaker}
{date} September 17, 2005 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} Participants:President William J. Clinton, Former President of theUnited StatesDavid Sandalow – Climate Change PanelLael Brainerd – Governance PanelGayle Smith – Poverty PanelRob Malley – Religion Panel {/description}

{speech} 

Shame on us if we allow the religious extremists to get to our children before we do. Shame on us. That was said at our last panel session by a young activist, but even though it was said at the end, it hovered through our panel from the very beginning, from the very first panel discussion we had. How do we get to our children before others get to them? Because others will get to them and we will pay the price.

In many ways the conversation we've had over the last few days on the religious reconciliation/conflict track was precedent-setting and I heard this from many of the leaders in the field, who told me they'd never before been at a gathering with business leaders, NGO activists, religious leaders, statesmen, and people from all sides of civil society, come to discuss what so often is unspoken – the role of religion in conflict, the role of religion in social issues, the role of religion in politics.

The industry of religious peace-building is only in its infancy and we're only taking the first steps. And it's in a race with the industry of hate-mongering, and we have to play catch-up. But what a good start we had over the last few days. Of course I want to thank President Clinton for that. I want to thank my colleague, Mickey Bergman, who did so much to make this possible, and everyone else that everyone else has thanked and who deserve a real good hand of applause.
{APPLAUSE}

Because it was the first conversation, it was at times an awkward and difficult one, and differences were expressed and we shouldn't shy away from that, about what Islamism is and the role of Islam in Muslim societies, in Muslim politics. About the root causes of some of the religious anger, to the extent to which political conflicts – whether it's the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the war in Iraq, or others – feed the anger, particularly in the Arab and Muslim worlds.

But nonetheless, despite the differences, day by day the degree of consensus, convergence was remarkable, surprising, and unanticipated. And the first consensus was with what I started off with – the priority target being the youth, the youth in the Arab world, the youth in the Muslim world, the youth right here at home. Everyone agrees, from Her Majesty Queen Rania, who made one of the most moving interventions in our panel this morning, talking about how we can't let our children fall prey to those who would use religion to evil ends, to Assistant Secretary Liz Cheney, to Prime Minister Erdogan of Turkey. Everyone agreed children are the target population and they're at greater risk today than they've been before. And the first priority is to give them economic opportunity, and we did discuss that from the very first plenary session in terms of what can be done in Gaza.

The second area of convergence was that we can't keep religion out, or if we do so, we do so at our peril. Rabbi Melchior, who was on one of our panels, said it best when he said, if we don't bring religion in, others will, and it will blow up in our faces. And who could doubt it? If you go to Palestine, who's providing the services today? It's Hamas. If you go to Lebanon, who's providing the services? It's Hezbollah. If you talk of the international conflicts, whether it's Israel and the Palestinians, Kashmir, Sudan, Nigeria, all these places, religion plays a role. And if we don't bring it in, if the peace builders don't bring it in, then others will diverge for their own purposes. Rabbi Melchior said it, and it wasn't too surprising, but we also heard it from Secretary Albright, who made a confession. She said in her years of office she never thought that religion should play a role in diplomacy. In fact, and I was honored to be part of her team during the years you were president, we sometimes made a conscious effort to keep religion out, thinking that once religion is in, positions get polarized, positions get hardened, and it's that much harder to reach compromise. But we shouldn't kid ourselves. These conflicts have a religious dimension, and if we don't bring the religious leaders in, others will raise the religious flag and they won't do it for the purposes that we want, and we won't be able to appeal to the moderates or the undecided, who may be listening to their religious leaders who we've excluded from the diplomatic peace-building process.

Secretary Albright, I'll make a plug for your next book, which will be interestingly entitled “The Mighty and the Almighty: United States foreign policy and God.”

The next priority which everyone saw there was so much consensus around, and I've heard actually from most of the topic coordinators, was education. There are so many misconceptions here about Islam, so many misconceptions there. We all know about the role that some of the madrassahs are playing, some of it good, some of it not so good. So there needs to be a real emphasis on education reform here, education reform in the Arab world, in Europe, throughout the world. And here we have some very interesting ideas. Her Majesty Queen Rania proposed that we establish a scholarship fund, exchange programs for disadvantaged students in the United States and in the Muslim world. Others had more modest proposals, but I think it showed the level of commitment that we had throughout the panel. They committed to read a book or two about Islam in the next year, and they suggest that Oprah Winfrey put several books on Islam on her next reading group list.

And as I was walking in here, I was reminded that in 1543 Martin Luther sponsored the printing of the first version of the Koran, and he said he was doing it because he wanted to spread knowledge of the Koran in Europe. Maybe it's time we get back to that.

The next area of convergence which was remarkably described this morning, was the interfaith youth service. Let's get young people from different faiths working together on areas where they would agree – fighting poverty, fighting AIDS, building houses. Rebuilding New Orleans was a suggestion that was made. Let's have in every neighborhood, in every city, at the national level, at the international level, interfaith youth services in which young children would – young kids would come together and work on issues on which they have convergence, which would be a way to get them motivated to do good, which would make them understand the perspective of the other, and would offer an alternative to the activities of those who have not had such proper ends.
{APPLAUSE}

I want to conclude on a note – Ebrahim Patel will be up there meeting you, Mr. President, in a meeting and when you'll be giving him his certificate, a remarkable young man who I think really moved everyone who was there this morning. He's a head of the Interfaith Youth Corps, and he made the following observation. He said, every time I come out of a meeting with a businessman and he hands me a check, I thank him for the $20,000 and I thank God. Burt in the back of my mind I know that Osama bin Laden is having a meeting where he just got $20 million and he's thanking his God. We need to invest more in religious peace-building. We need to invest more in religious conflict resolution and religious understanding because the stakes are so high. We took a remarkable step here, and the number of commitments we've gotten, just on the basis of the panel discussions, was an eye-opener to me, and I really thank everyone here who made those commitments.

President Clinton is here, and I think we all owe it to him to make even more commitments over the years to come because, as I said, so much is at stake and it's a race that we can't afford to lose. Thank you.
{APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
