{title} Summation and Closing Address of the Clinton Global Initiative {/title}
{event} New York, NY {/event}
{speaker} Robert Malley {/speaker}
{date} September 22, 2006 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Mr. President, why is it that some diverse societies are able to overcome their differences and live in relative peace and harmony, whereas in others, differences persist and end up in deadly conflict? Why is it that a child born today in Saudi Arabia, Jordan, or Egypt, is far more likely than a few decades ago to grow up fearing the West? And why is it that a child born here, in the United States today, is far more likely than a few decades ago to live and grow up feeling threatened by Islam? And why is it that some conflicts that appear to be intractable, like the South African conflict, were resolved, whereas others whose resolution always seems just within reach, like the Israeli/Arab conflict, go on and on and on?

Those are the questions that our sessions looked at -- fascinating, formidable questions. And I want to thank my deputy, Mickey Bergman, who gave me a tremendous hand and without whom I couldn't have done any of this. And I want to thank everyone here, because those who participated in these panel discussions and those who were at the tables did more than simply point the way to how we could answer these questions. They led the way, because everything I'm going to mention now, for each of the ideas that I'll mention, somebody stepped up, made a commitment on the spot, and I just got one even as I was walking up here.

So what are the answers they suggested? Number one: focus on youth. There's a battle going on for their souls and their hearts and their minds, and sometimes we look as if we're not even in the starting block. How do you get to them? You aim high and you aim young. Many of the people in the panels were telling us, “Let's try to get into the curriculum for very young age children intercultural, interfaith teachings. Let's engage with immigrant communities to help forge these new curricula. Let's have more exchange programs between Arabs and Americans and others.” And again, on each one of those, we had people coming up and saying they would fund programs.

Secondly, media, pop culture, movies, sports, because we're not witnessing a clash of civilizations. We're witnessing a clash of ignorances, people who don't know each other and therefore fear one another. What one of our panelists said -- he was quoting -- he was trying to explain why it's so important to understand what matters to others. And he said, “We are most violent when others violate what we hold most dear.” And therefore, we have to know and learn what others hold dear, or we will have more and more violence.

And how do we do that? With movies -- movies about the Middle East -- and Jeff Skoll, as you know has already done something. He's going to be doing more, as he committed. Television shows: Let's to do Muslims what the Bill Cosby show did to African-Americans. Let's humanize them and let's break down the stereotypes and the caricatures. Let's train journalists who could be able to explain things in a way that also would break down the stereotypes. And let's have more exchange programs between journalists. Let's use music. And this is the commitment I just got walking up here, from Salman Ahmad, the rock star, as most of you know, who's committing to have concerts throughout South Asia to promote greater political, religious, and cultural understanding. {APPLAUSE}

We also have to bring religion back into our public discourse, and also in our discourse about conflict resolution. This was mentioned last year by Secretary Albright. It was mentioned again this year. Like it or not, religion matters, and it matters to many people around the world. How do we do it? We bring them to the table. We have honest interfaith dialogue, and we speak to people on the other side, and we bring it in to the table at the time of the political negotiations. It can be done, and it's being done more and more.

Engage with people we don't agree with. We don't like it. We don't like what they have to say. But they're the ones who often have the constituencies, who have the resources, who know how to speak to people. We have to communicate with them. We have to engage with them. We have to do it. Otherwise, we're leaving large segments of the population beyond our reach. {APPLAUSE}

But the biggest “How?” of all is what all of you in this room can do, what people with small steps or big steps can do, the fortunate among us most of all. It's not self-evident, particularly in this issue. You can't really quantify the results. How do you know when you've broken down a stereotype? How do you know when a caricature is no longer guiding our actions? How do you know whether conflict between Islam and the West is receding? But it matters. If we're not doing better at conflict prevention, conflict mitigation, conflict resolution; if we're not doing better at building bridges between the Muslim World and the West, we can forget about expanding health care in those conflict areas. We can forget about alleviating poverty. And we can forget about cooperation between different nations on issues such as climate change.

It's not easy, but it's been done. And I want to mention the case of Jeffrey Swartz, who is the head of Timberland, and who faced this question: What does making boots have to do with Darfur? Economically, it made no sense. How does he explain it to his shareholders? But he said he faced a choice. One option was to be engaged in a logical action helping the people of Darfur. And the other one was to be missing in action. He chose, and because all of you are here, you chose, too.

I want to speak about the Israeli/Palestinian conflict, because it overshadowed, in a way, so many of our sessions. It's a broken record to say that the Israeli/Palestinian conflict is at the heart of so much, but it's a broken record because it's broken so many lives. Terrorism is not going to cease if we resolve it. Muslims may still be angry. We'll still have problems. There will still be alienation among Muslim communities in the West. But there's no single step we could take that would make a bigger difference than resolving the Arab/Israeli conflict. {APPLAUSE} This was the panel discussion that generated the most passion, the most controversy. It was the most difficult we had. And there was not that much that our three panelists, a Lebanese, an Israeli, and a Palestinian, agreed on. But I can't resist saying the one thing they all agreed on unanimously and without any hesitation. Just four words: Bring back President Clinton. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE} 

I'd like to end on a more personal note. My father's Egyptian. I'm Jewish. I was born in New York. I was raised in France. So I know something about being culturally and religiously conflicted. {LAUGHTER} And still, I learned something working with President Clinton and with Senator Clinton about tolerance. They taught me a thing or two. And watching them over the years, not once did I see either one of them look down upon, speak down to, or even think down about another culture, another race, another faith. And when you're trying to make a different world, that, Mr. President, makes a world of difference. Thank you very much. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
