{title} Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session With Women Leaders of Christian Religious Organizations {/title}
{event} Room 450, Old Executive Office Building {/event}
{speaker} Ronald Reagan {/speaker}
{date} October 13, 1983 {/date}
{source} http://www.reagan.utexas.edu/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you all very much, and good afternoon. And thank you also for honoring us by coming by here today. I'm very grateful to have this chance to speak with you. Many groups come to visit here, but I believe yours is the first leadership group of Christian women to be welcomed to the White House in a long, long time, and I'm glad to be the one that's doing the greeting. I won't speculate why this hasn't been done before. I only know that as long as I'm President, your group and others who stand up for our Judeo-Christian values will be welcome here, because you belong here.

I can't say strongly enough what a tremendous force for good you are. As life-bearers, carrying on traditions of family in the home, but also in our schools, the corporate world, in the workplace, you're teachers of cooperation, tolerance, compassion, and responsibility. No greater truth shines through than the one you live by every day: that preserving America must begin with faith in the God who has blessed our land. And we don't have the answers; He does.

Isaiah reminded us that "The Lord opens His gates and keeps in peace the nation that trusts in Him." I hope you won't mind my saying I think I know you all very well. Nelle Reagan, my mother, God rest her soul, had an unshakable faith in God's goodness. And while I may not have realized it in my youth, I know now that she planted that faith very deeply in me. She made the most difficult Christian message seem very easy. And, like you, she knew you could never repay one bad deed with another. Her way was forgiveness and goodness, and both began with love.

For some time now I believe that America has been hungering for a return to spiritual values that some of us fear we've tended to forget -- things like faith, families, family values, the bedrock of our nation. Thanks to the creation of new networks of faith by so many of you and your families, we're seeing more clearly again. We're remembering that freedom carries responsibilities. And we're not set free so that we can become slaves to sin.

The Founding Fathers believed that faith in God was the key to our being a good people and America's becoming a great nation. George Washington kissed the Bible at his inauguration. And to those who would have government separate us from religion, he had these words: "Reason and experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle." And Ben Franklin, at the time when they were struggling with what was to be the American Constitution, finally one day said to those who were working with him that, "Without God's help, we shall succeed in this political building no better than the builders of Babel." And if we ever forget that, we're lost. From that day on they opened all of the constitutional meetings with prayer.

I pray that we won't lose that idea, and that's why I was motivated to proclaim or designate 1983 the Year of the Bible.

And I hope that we will also recognize the true meaning of the first amendment. Its words were meant to guarantee freedom of religion to everyone. But I believe the first amendment has been twisted to the point that freedom of religion is in danger of becoming freedom from religion. But keep the faith. This year the Supreme Court took two big steps toward common sense. {LAUGHTER} It said that the first amendment does not prevent legislators in the Nebraska State Assembly from hiring a chaplain to open their sessions with prayer. And it said the Constitution does not prevent the State of Minnesota from giving a tax break to parents who choose private or religious schooling for their children. In both cases the Court decided in favor of what our Justice Department recommended in friend of the court briefs.

Now we're making another recommendation. We believe the city of Pawtucket, Rhode Island, and for that matter, any city in America, has the right to include the Nativity scene as part of its annual Christmas performance.

Government is not supposed to wage war against God and religion, not in the United States of America. I want to see the Congress act on our constitutional amendment permitting voluntary prayer in America's schoolrooms. And here you can be our greatest help. Tell the millions of our friends to send a message of thunder from the grassroots, fill the halls of Congress with calls, with letters and telegrams -- not postcards. I understand they don't take postcards as seriously as they take letters. {LAUGHTER} And tell them, "The people have waited too long; we want action."

We think it's also time for a vote on tuition tax credits. Education's the fundamental right and responsibility of every parent. And we should remember that those who pay private tuition also pay their full share of taxes to support the public school system. Tuition tax credits would only threaten public schools if you believe that more competition, greater parental choice, and stronger local control will make our schools worse, not better.

Finally, let me just say a few words about another part of freedom that is under siege: the sanctity of human life. Either the law protects human beings, or it doesn't. When we're dealing with a handicapped child -- say, a mentally retarded baby girl who needs medical care to survive, is she not entitled to the protection of the law? Will she be denied her chance for love and life because someone decides she's too weak to warrant our help, or because someone has taken it upon themselves to decide the quality of her life doesn't justify keeping her alive? Is that not God's decision to make? And isn't it our duty to serve even the least of these for in so doing, we serve Him?

Our administration has tried to make sure the handicapped receive the respect of the law for the dignity of their lives. And the same holds true, I believe deeply, for the unborn. It may not help me in some polls to say this publicly, but until and unless it can be proven that the unborn child is not a living human being -- and I don't think it can be proven -- then we must protect the right of the unborn to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.

Now, I've been talking longer than I intended, because I had a little something else to suggest here. But hardly a day goes by that I'm not told -- sometimes in letters and sometimes by people that I meet and perfect strangers -- and they tell me that they're praying for me. Well, thanks to Nelle Reagan, I believe in intercessionary prayer. And I know that those prayers are giving me a strength that I otherwise would not possess.

I believe in the goodness of our people. And yet, I wonder if we shouldn't be reminded of the promise in Second Chronicles: "If my people which are called by my name shall humble themselves and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, then I will hear from heaven and will forgive their sin and heal their land."

Well, now, I'm not going to say anything else for a little bit in the line of talking, because I just thought we might have a dialog. I know I only have a few minutes here to be with you. But sometime, some of you must have said, "If I had a chance, I would ask him -- " {LAUGHTER} So, why don't you ask me? 

{/speech}
