{title} Remarks at a Presidential Campaign Rally for George Bush in Los Angeles, California {/title}
{event} Los Angeles Ballroom, Century Plaza Hotel {/event}
{speaker} Ronald Reagan {/speaker}
{date} August 24, 1988 {/date}
{source} http://www.reagan.utexas.edu/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. {LAUGHTER} No. Thank you, Governor Deukmejian, Senator and Mrs. Wilson, and Barbara and Mr. Vice President. Well, now, wait a minute! You're already President of the Senate, so thank you, Mr. President. Now, you know, George, some people have been kind enough to say that I'm a great communicator. But after your speech to the convention, I'd say America has another great communicator. And he's going to be America's next President. And I must confess, I like your running mate, too. He has many more years of experience in dealing with national security issues than the head of the other ticket. He's the author of the Job Training Partnership Act, and thousands of Americans are working today because of that legislation. And he has the most important qualification of all for a copilot: He won't be trying to turn the plane in one direction while the pilot is flying it in the other.

Dan Quayle stands for the same principles George Bush and I stand for. We have a big job ahead of us this November. It was more than two decades ago that we first launched, right here in California, our crusade to restore America's freedom and its greatness. We Californians lit the spark here in our State. We nursed it and tended it until it grew into a flame and then into a great beacon fire that has illuminated our nation and inspired the world.

As this fire has grown brighter in the last 8 years; as we cut interest rates, as George told you, to half of what they were and inflation to a third of what it was; as we set America on the longest peacetime expansion in history and gave new vitality to America's promise of opportunity; as we restored America's reduction of -- well, I should say strength, not reduction -- I'm jumping ahead of myself here -- {LAUGHTER} -- and negotiated the first real reduction of U.S. and Soviet nuclear missiles in world history; as we achieved all this, no one has been closer to my side and has contributed more to our success than George Bush.

And yet, my friends, I must tell you that everything George Bush and I have done these last 8 years, everything, could be lost faster than you can say furlough. {LAUGHTER} I said in New Orleans that the convention our liberal opponents held in Atlanta was the biggest masquerade since last year's Mardi Gras. {LAUGHTER} Our opponents adopted our rhetoric and our slogans, but every word was like a mask which hid the liberal face of their agenda. When they said opportunity, they meant subsidies. When they said reducing the deficit, they meant raising taxes. When they said strong defense, they meant cutting defense spending. And that's why I've just got to believe that when the American people say election day, they'll mean "We want George Bush!"

Yes, hard as they tried to hide, the liberals gave themselves away when they said that if they're elected, the Reagan era will be over. Well, now, I'd like to ask you something. When George Bush and I took office 8 years ago, America was in the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. We turned that around and since our expansion began, we've created, as George told you, actually it's been now more than 17\1/2\ million jobs, reduced the unemployment rate to the lowest it's been in 14 years, and presided over the greatest flowering of new businesses and new technology in the history of the world. For every plant that closes in America today, every business that closes, six new ones are started. So, do you want this era to be over?

{AUDIENCE} No! {/AUDIENCE} 

Well, let me ask you another question. Between 1977 and 1981, the real income of the typical American family dropped by almost 7 percent. Think of what that means -- if somebody were just to cut your paycheck by that much today -- how much less you could buy at the grocery store, the clothes you couldn't get for your children, the books you couldn't buy for their education, and how you might have to cut back when your church or synagogue passes the collection plate each week. Yet that's just what happened under the last administration. Since 1981, the year we took office, real family income has soared almost 9 percent. Do you want this era to be over? {APPLAUSE}

During the last liberal administration, the Justice Department started to lose interest in narcotics cases. Each year they brought fewer cases, and convictions were down by almost half by their last year in office. Since George Bush and I got in there, Federal narcotics convictions have more than doubled. And while the number of drug users soared during the last administration, it's dropping now. And recently we got the best news of all: High school students have heard the plea of a certain lovely lady I know, and they are saying no to drugs. And that includes no to cocaine. Now, do you want this progress to be lost and this era to be over?

{AUDIENCE} No! {/AUDIENCE} 

Well, this year, the liberal opposition has fielded a three-headed ticket that doesn't know left from center. {LAUGHTER} They talk about reaching for the center, but on issues like national defense, they've taken positions that only a McGovern could love. {LAUGHTER} As former Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger wrote recently, their ticket seems to believe that, in Secretary Schlesinger's words, "the way to deter war is to be unprepared to respond." They would cut the B - 1 bomber, the MX missile, our Strategic Defense Initiative, as George told you, and two carrier battle groups.

{AUDIENCE} No! {/AUDIENCE} 

In fact, what they plan for the Navy is so bad, by the time they get through, Michael may have to row the boat ashore. {LAUGHTER} He won't have any other choice.

Yes, my friends, when our liberal friends refuse to even whisper the "L" word and insist that "this election is not about ideology; it's about competence," they're just acknowledging that where they want to take America, America doesn't want to go. They know, as well as you do, as well as our nation does, that the one issue, the only issue, that will matter after Inauguration Day is the issue of direction. Will we reelect peace and prosperity or will we play truth or consequences with trenchcoat liberals? {LAUGHTER}

Throughout our history, whenever this great and blessed land has searched for true leadership, it has found it; and this year is no exception. I've worked more closely with George Bush these two terms than with any other member of the administration. I've seen him keep a cool head in hot crises. I've seen his leadership and vision. I've given him some of the most sensitive and difficult tasks that we've had, and he has never let me or the country down.

I once said that he is a great Vice President, but I know and I've seen that it didn't come easily. George Bush is a man of action, a man accustomed to command. The Vice Presidency doesn't fit easily on such a man. But George Bush is also a patriot. And so, he made it fit, and he served with a distinction no one has ever matched. Day in, day out, I've sought George Bush's counsel from the very first day of our administration. Believe me, no one is better prepared to lead America into the next decade and to the threshold of the next century, to continue the work that we've begun, to finish the task that is before us, than President George Bush.

There's one way, however, that I hope a Bush administration will be different. If it hadn't been for a Republican Senate in our first 6 years, we wouldn't have accomplished half of what we did. If we'd had one these last 2 years, we could have done much more. But today, with the other party in control of both Houses, we face a monkey-wrench Congress, determined to throw almost anything into the gears of government to gum up the works. I hope we can make sure that George Bush has more friends on Capitol Hill than he had on that Pacific Island where he was shot down. And there's no better way to start that than to return Pete Wilson to the United States Senate and to elect Republican congressional candidates to the House.

Should I remind you that the gerrymandering that has gone on, particularly in this State, with regard to congressional districts and State legislative districts has been such that in the last election more Californians voted for Republican congressional candidates than there were votes for the Democratic candidates. But the Democratic candidates outnumbered -- when they were elected -- the Republicans elected to that office because they have gerrymandered the district so, that a majority of Californians become a minority when it comes to counting by those districts.

{BOOING} 

The President. Nothing would please me more than for President Bush to have an Inauguration Day gift: a Republican Congress. {APPLAUSE} You know, it's time for that.

Yes, I had a Republican Senate, one House for 6 years. But in the last 56 years, only one Republican President has had a Republican Congress in both Houses, and that was for only 2 of his 8 years -- during the Eisenhower term. For 56 years, 52 of those years the House of Representatives has been held by the Democrats.

{BOOING} 

Well, on that Inauguration Day -- it's coming -- I know I'll be thinking of the journey we Californians began two decades ago, a journey of rebirth for ourselves and our nation. As it has been so often since then, our choice this year is simple: the future or the past. Back to the past of inflation, humiliation, and malaise; or continue forward with George Bush on the road of hope, opportunity, and peace. We saw here in California a few years ago how quickly a liberal administration could undo years of our good work. Let's not let that happen again.

They say our State is close, but I have a hunch I know which way California will go in the end. Because the hope, opportunity, and peace that George Bush stands for are the same things that California stands for. Hope and opportunity in a land of peace. That's what I found when I first climbed on a train and headed here so many years ago. That's what California, like America, has been for so many millions through the years.

So, here's my last request to you. Put California in the Republican column this November. Send Pete Wilson back to the Senate. Send George Bush to the White House. And yes, I know I'm copying something that was just said here once before, but I don't mind saying it again: Go out and win one last one for the Gipper!

Thank you all. Thank you all, and God bless you. 

{/speech}
