{title} Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at the University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa {/title}
{event} Memorial Coliseum, Tuscaloosa, Alabama {/event}
{speaker} Ronald Reagan {/speaker}
{date} October 15, 1984 {/date}
{source} http://www.reagan.utexas.edu/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you all very much. And, Senator Denton, I thank you very much.

You know, when I left the White House this morning, it was kind of good to say, "I'm Alabamie bound." But it is wonderful to be here at the University of Alabama, the home of the Crimson Tide. And, incidentally, I might say to the members of your football squad, and also to all of you who are such obvious supporters -- I know you have a fine team and I know that you've been a little disappointed in part of the opening of the season. But then came last Saturday, and you became Lion tamers.

You'll never know how tempted I am to say you won one for the Gipper. {LAUGHTER} You just stay with it, and I know you're going to win big this season.

Now, many States only have one great football team -- and I know that this is going to shake the rafters, but -- {LAUGHTER} -- you have two powerhouses, the Auburn Tigers -- --

{BOOING} {LAUGHTER}

It isn't very often I asked to be booed. {LAUGHTER}

Well, I know also that your campus is one of the most beautiful in the country. I know this because I've been reminded of it by a valued member of my staff, Margaret Tutwiler, who hails from Alabama and who graduated from UA.

She told me of the discovery last month of the original foundation of the university rotunda that was built before the Civil War and how it was once the centerpiece of this campus. And now it's turned up and still solid. And I got to thinking about how after all this time that foundation is still there and standing strong. And I'm involved in a campaign for reelection -- or didn't you know? {LAUGHTER} I am seeking another term, because our work has begun, the foundation has been laid, and the building, though, is unfinished. There's much left to do.

The centerpiece of our administration is one word: freedom. The foundation has been a program aimed at lowering tax rates, revitalizing the economy, and creating opportunity so that every American gets a chance at a good life.

The present has benefited from our program, but it's the future that we're building. Inflation was over 12 percent when we came into office, and now it's down around 4. And that means the poor and the people on fixed incomes are finding it easier to get by.

Now, that's true, but it doesn't quite capture the larger point of what we're doing. When I came in here I started thinking about a phrase that you might be familiar with that expresses our philosophy of economic growth. It's "Roll tide, roll."

{AUDIENCE} Roll tide, roll! {/AUDIENCE} 

Hey, that's great.

Over the past 3 years, we cut personal tax rates for all Americans by 25 percent. You know, when we spend our own money, businesses and entrepreneurs profit, expand, and create jobs. And it has the force of a rolling tide. When we put our tax savings in the bank, that capital is available for all kinds of expansion, which creates growth and opportunity and more jobs. And when you cut personal tax rates, you create an incentive that frees up all the boldness and creativity within us. And that too has the force of a rolling tide. Take away incentive and give up your dreams. All of us should be able to keep as much of the fruits of our labor as possible.

In 1980, when we took a new turn, we were declaring once again that the challenge of America begins with challenging its people -- not challenging government to do more for them.

Now, the other night my opponent suggested that when I am reelected I intend to raise your taxes. Well, I agree with half of that statement -- the part about being reelected. But as I said then -- and I'll say again -- my goal is to get personal tax rates further down, not up. And this is where he and I definitely differ. To pay for all the promises he's made, he would have to raise taxes the equivalent of $1,890 per household. That's more than $150 a month. I know that you and your parents have other things to do -- or that you'd like to spend that money on -- like tuition.

But we're talking about more than personal hardship here. If we go back to the old days of raising taxes and raising spending, we'll kill the prosperity that we're now enjoying. People will have less money, spend less money, save less money. No new jobs will be created, and many jobs will be lost. I don't think you want economic policies that will send you from the graduation line to the unemployment line.

{AUDIENCE} No! {/AUDIENCE} 

You've been spending years receiving a fine education, and all of you have a great deal to contribute to make this world a better place. And you deserve wide open opportunities for your talents when you get out of school.

I think my opponent's economic policies and programs are about as bad as they can be. And when he comes down here and says his ideas are best for the South, he's handing you the ultimate Mason-Dixon Line. {LAUGHTER} You know, buying his economic policies is like going to a used-car lot to buy back the lemon you sold them 4 years ago.

Now, prosperity at home is only part of what we're trying to achieve. We've been moving quickly these last 3\1/2\ years or so toward peace through strength. We know it's America's role in the world to stand for something.

We need to be a reliable friend to our allies and a good neighbor to our friends nearby, and you can't be any of those things without strength. We always want everyone in the world to understand that Uncle Sam is a friendly old man, but he has a spine of steel.

If I could just interject an aside here right now -- today a momentous event will be taking place in the cause of peace in Central America, as President Duarte of El Salvador meets with the leaders of the Salvadoran guerrillas. President Duarte is participating at great personal risk, but it's a risk worth taking in the cause of peace, and the President has our prayers for success in this historic endeavor.

When we liberated Grenada from Communist thugs, we were being a good friend to our Caribbean neighbors who'd come to us and asked us to help restore peace to the island. We did it. And we liberated some American students in the process. And we can be proud of what we did that day, and proud of the young men and women in our Armed Forces who made that possible.

Now, my opponent by the way, seems to have that liberation confused with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. {LAUGHTER} He said what we did in Grenada eroded our moral authority to criticize the Soviets. I've never had any problem criticizing them. {LAUGHTER}

But my opponent seems confused about so many things. {LAUGHTER} He said some years back that the old days of a Soviet strategy of suppression by force are over. And he said that just before the Soviet Union invaded Czechoslovakia. {LAUGHTER} And then after they invaded Afghanistan, he said, "It just baffles me why the Soviets these last few years have behaved as they have." {LAUGHTER} So much baffles him. {LAUGHTER}

He said our administration's economic programs are obviously, murderously inflationary. And that was just before we lowered inflation from more than 12 percent to about 4. {LAUGHTER} He said, "Sometimes we need a deficit to stimulate the economy." Now he says a deficit is dangerous. He says he cares about the middle class, and proudly declares, "I have consistently supported legislation, time after time, which increases taxes on our constituents." That makes you want to be one of his constituents again, doesn't it? {LAUGHTER}

Well, he's for economic growth, but 4 years ago he said we needed an economic slowdown to bring down inflation. He promises Camelot, but he would give us a reign of error.

America is at peace, and the economy is in one piece. And I think if we all stick together, we'll move on together, and we'll recreate a country rich in opportunity and enterprise, growth, and creativity; a country even greater in areas of art and learning and scientific inquiry -- even greater in worship and belief.

We need your help, and we can't do it without you. We need your idealism, your optimism, your faith. You're a very special generation, and I'm happy that the future is going to be in your hands.

Now, let me say that all of you have been well served by the efforts of your fine Members of Congress, Senator Jeremiah Denton, Congressman Jack Edwards, and Congressman Bill Dickinson.

Now, I have to leave soon, but I can't go without talking a minute about a great man that I was proud to call friend -- Bear Bryant. He was sort of the essential American. And, you know, a few years back, I set a kind of a record here at the University of Alabama. I was here to go to a formal dinner where I was to be the after dinner speaker. And Bear invited me to come out and visit practice out here -- football practice.

Well, the only way it could be worked out and the timing and all was that I had to put the tux on first. So, there I was out on the practice field throwing a ball around with about 65 fellows, and I was in black tie. {LAUGHTER} Bear got quite a kick out of this. But he really started to laugh when it began to rain. {LAUGHTER}

He was a leader, patriotic to the core, devoted to his players, and inspired by a winning spirit that wouldn't quit. And that's how he made legends out of ordinary people. He was a true American hero, and he was Alabama's own.

The greatness of America and the solution to her problems begins with the people -- with all of you. You know that dreams, drive, courage, and creativity make all the difference. You know, better than anyone, that it's in the hearts of the people that the tide begins to roll.

I'm most grateful to you for asking me here. But now I'm going to quit having a monolog, because I understand we've got a little time that we can have a dialog, and some of you have some questions. Mondale says I don't do this. 

{/speech}
