{title} Remarks and a Question-and-Answer Session at Bolingbrook High School in Bolingbrook, Illinois {/title}
{event} Bolingbrook, Illinois {/event}
{speaker} Ronald Reagan {/speaker}
{date} October 16, 1984 {/date}
{source} http://www.reagan.utexas.edu/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you, Governor Jim Thompson, for that most gracious and -- I'm very greatly honored by that introduction. And distinguished Members of the Congress, the officials of your school, and you, I thank you all for that heartwarming reception. It's great to be back in Illinois, and it's great to be back in the proud town of Bolingbrook.

I understand that this is your homecoming week. Well, since I'm back in my home State, this is homecoming for me, too. And I'll have to say, I've never felt more welcome than I do right now. So, may I express best wishes to a certain football team that's called the Raiders? I don't suppose you'd like to win one for the Gipper? {APPLAUSE}

But last year alone, on another score, 49 students from Bolingbrook High received Presidential Academic Fitness Awards.

I'd also like to congratulate everyone who helps make your school one of the best in the nation. Your outstanding principal, Everette Green, your dedicated faculty, your school board, and especially you, the students. Together, you can set a standard for all schools to follow.

And today, we have just 3 weeks before election day. And our choice is, as the Governor said, as clear as any has ever been before us. Should we go forward with new optimism, prosperity, and strength, or should we go back to the policies of soaring taxation and spending that weakened our economy, snuffed out so many opportunities and threw away so many -- or threw so many, not away, but millions of people into hardship?

We've already seen what happens when we follow the policies that our opponents have so faithfully promised to restore, the failed policies of tax and tax and spend and spend.

We saw a once-proud nation staggered by a steady erosion of economic growth. We saw punishing inflation and interest rates, a record peacetime tax burden, rising unemployment, and weakened defenses. We saw families breaking up, bedrock values of work and neighborhood undermined, crime rates rising. You've probably noticed that our opponents talk a great deal about fairness. Well, in one sense their policies were fair: they didn't discriminate; they made everybody miserable. {LAUGHTER}

Since the aim of education is to prepare America's youth for the future, it was only natural that when our leaders lost faith in that future many of our principals, teachers, and students felt robbed of their sense of purpose. Scholastic aptitude test scores underwent a virtually unbroken decline for 20 years, and science achievement scores showed a similar drop. School discipline began to break down, and we found out that many of our 17-year-olds were functionally illiterate.

When our administration came into office we put education at the top of the national agenda, and we worked to return States, local governments and, yes, your parents to their rightful place in education. And what do you know? We're seeing results. From Maine to Illinois to California, your parents, teachers, school administrators, and all of you have begun to make our schools stronger and better. Your achievement is up. And this year's scholastic aptitude test scores rose 4 points, and that was the largest increase in over 20 years.

Now, much as we'd like to, our administration would like to take credit, but we can't. It belongs to you. All we did was something that every President from Washington to Lincoln did: trust the people.

And when our opponents look at America -- well, my opponent seems to only see big government and little people. And he has only one program to offer: raise our taxes, and then raise them again, so that government can be even bigger. His tax hike would be the equivalent of $1,890 per year per household in the United States. That's more than $150 each and every month. Do you think we should sit back and let that happen to America?

{AUDIENCE} No! {/AUDIENCE} 

Well, I know you probably watched the Olympics this summer and cheered on our American athletes. Well, in our country today there are two teams -- the Washington Tax Increase Team and the American Opportunity Team. And now, making the economy bear the burden of our opponent's tax hike would be like having a coach tell an Olympic swimmer that he had to swim down that pool carrying an anvil, or a runner to sprint with a ball and chain around his ankle. But that's just what Coach Tax Hike and his Tax Increase Team want to do.

And they kicked off their fall campaign with a call for $85 billion in new taxes. I said it was a kickoff. There are those who believe it was a punt -- {LAUGHTER} -- and we mean to turn it into a blocked kick.

We on the American Opportunity Team want to bring everybody's personal tax rates further down, not up. We want to create opportunity so that all Americans can go forward together with nobody left behind. And come November, the American people will decide which team is America's team.

When their Washington Tax Increase Team was in charge, all they did was fumble. Well, today the American Opportunity Team has the ball back, and all of us are scoring touchdowns again.

Inflation is down, while growth and jobs and investment are up. Crime is stopping -- or dropping. Our defenses are stronger. Our people are united, and, yes, this beloved country of ours is at peace.

The great choice that our country must make in 3 weeks will decide not just who will occupy the White House or who will sit in the Congress, it'll determine the kind of America that we pass on to all of you, as the Governor said. And if our opponents have their way, too many of you students would have to go from the graduation line straight to the unemployment line, and that's not good enough for America.

If we win, we're going to build a future together that will enable every one of you to reach for the stars, and you'll know what it is to enter the work force or go to college in a land of prosperity, pride, and hope.

When I was a young man, you knew that if you dreamed big and worked hard there was no limit to how far you could go. We're determined to bring that kind of real opportunity back for you, our sons and daughters, and I guess in my case I'd better say, and our grandsons and granddaughters. {LAUGHTER}

Well, we've already made a good beginning. But a big job awaits us to keep improving our schools, to lead the world toward new frontiers of science, technology, and space, and, yes, to bring the personal tax rates further down so we can create more jobs and more opportunity for a better future.

Together, we can and will make America a shining city on a hill where our young men and women can dream great dreams and make them come true.

Now, I'm going to stop with the monolog. I know that our time is limited, and we probably only have a few minutes left. But I understand that there are a few of you that could have some questions here, and I'd like to take those questions. I wish I could do more of that, but the time is limited. So, which microphone? 

{/speech}
