{title} Speech to European Parliament {/title}
{event} European Parliament, Strasbourg {/event}
{speaker} Simone Veil {/speaker}
{date} December 9, 1986 {/date}
{source} http://www.margaretthatcher.org/speeches/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Mr President, like all those who have spoken before me, I can only express great disappointment at the outcome of the European Council meeting in London, to which I would add a serious word of warning to all our governments, represented here by the President of the European Council.

We all know about the external threats to our countries, and about the internal problems currently beseting the Community. Nevertheless, it is worthwhile outlining them very briefly to draw attention—should that be necessary—to the gulf between the seriousness of the situation in Europe, which is bordering on breakdown, and the inadequacy, futility almost, of the European Council's response.

In external affairs, the doubts that have arisen in the wake of the Reykjavik meeting as to whether the Americans are sufficiently aware of European preoccupations and the specific dangers facing us should prompt a concerted European response and a resolve to get ourselves into a position to act together. It is not an adequate response to say that the need to work together on either side of the Atlantic has never been more necessary than today, but it is true that what weakens the United States also weakens Europe and the entire free world.

But who can fail to appeciate that a weak Europe also weakens the free world? Indeed, we know that Japan itself is beginning to get worried about this and to realize that overall balance in the world rests on Europe as well, and starting to regret that Europe is so weak. But it is we who should be the first to be aware of the role that we should be playing and to rebuild our strength and help the free world. I am certainly not unaware of the institutional difficulties which make it impossible as matters stand to adopt a direct approach to certain problems, security problems in particular. Nevertheless, Europe ought to be able to respond and to begin thinking about ways of dealing with these problems. Above all, it ought to demonstrate its determination to strengthen its unity so that it will carry more weight in international relations.

Similarly, who could fail to be bitterly disappointed by the misunderstandings and blunders of one sort and another which, for all the explanations given after the event, have made it clear to the public that our countries do not share the same attitude to terrorism and the countries involved in terrorism? This confusion, coupled with the confusion created in the United States by the revelations about arms sales, has at the very least borne in on us the weakness of the solidarity between one partner and another, the gap between words and actions, but, worst of all, the quick succession of such grave developments prompts the question whether there are not much deeper differences on the policies to be adopted in relation to the Middle East, and more specifically in relation to the countries which are involved to a greater or lesser extent in terrorism. We do not know which country we should be more or less supporting, which course of action we should be taking. What, then, is the point of saying that efforts to combat terrorism are being stepped up when we are so divided on the fundamentals?

Turning now to the Soviet Union, it is again possible to come to the conclusion that we have no overall policy. Does the onslaught of charm betoken a real, profound change in Soviet policy, or is it just a change to a new method, a more dangerous one than those used in the past? That is a matter of concern to our countries, but it is also a matter of very direct concern to Europeans as the Community to have a response on this point, since the Community is the target of these blandishments. At present, both the Commission and Parliament are faced with the question of what type of relations they as Community institutions ought to have with the Soviet Union and the other East European countries. Recognition is of course the crux of the matter, but it is important for our countries to reach an agreed posture on this matter. Is any attention being paid to this, apart from the repeated condemnation—but this is the very least that could be expected—of the occupation of Afghanistan and the violations of human rights, in breach of the undertakings given at Helsinki, bearing in mind the obvious fact that our countries' positions on this essential issue are significantly at variance?

Finally, Europe seems to be less and less concerned with the Third World. I would go so far as to say that it has even given up pretending to be. We are worried about this lack of cohesion, but we are equally if not more worried about the Community's internal difficulties, whether in making progress towards Union by completing the internal market or simply in solving the most immediate problems facing us.

It was just a year ago that the Heads of State or Government reached agreement on the Single Act. Despite its shortcomings, we accepted it. Even at that stage, though, we were already giving warnings about the conditions under which it would have to be applied and about the narrow construction that might be put on the only provisions which represented progress, those on majority voting and Parliament's powers.

No reassurance has been given on this point, either by a Council regulation or indeed by the interpretations of the Single Act by those countries which have ratified it so far. Some have not yet ratified it; this suggests that it might not be brought into effect by the scheduled date, and we are extremely worried about that. At the same time, though, we should like to know whether it is not purely for show that these interpretations have been made and majority voting will in fact be adopted.

I should also like to stress in this connection, Madam, that you have given us certain assurances and even indicated that it was said at the European Council that majority voting should be adopted immediately, without awaiting ratification of the Single Act. This is the approach that has made it possible for 11 directives and regulations of varying importance to be adopted. Nevertheless, this falls far short of the figure in excess of a hundred mooted for 1986. Were we to continue at this rate, it would doubtless take until the year 2000 to clear all this work.

Apart from that, though, I have to say that while we welcome the measures taken for small and medium-sized businesses, while we welcome the strategy adopted in certain fields, the shortcomings are glaringly obvious to us. First of all, it has to be pointed out as far as the cooperative strategy for growth is concerned that this approach had already been recommended in the Albert/Ball report and, where unemployment is concerned, the Community has consistently failed to take timely action for the past 10 years. A re-reading of the various European Council resolutions is enough to demonstrate this. They would have been right three years earlier. They were no longer right by the time they materialized.

On technology, let's be frank, if the Council is not going to say yes to 7 billion ECU, we really shall be able to say to the people of Europe: on the one hand, expenditure of 480 billion ECU out of the national budgets; on the other, 7 billion refused by the Community. And they have the gall to talk of a European will to promote technological progress! They have a nerve! The figures speak for themselves. {APPLAUSE}

The same applies to Erasmus. Let us hope for an early settlement of this matter, on which my group has incidentally tabled an urgent motion for a resolution.

These are important but secondary matters. Steps have been taken, undertakings given. It remains for concrete action to be taken on them. Worst of all are the fundamental problems which are currently proving very real obstacles to the Community's progress. I refer both to the budget and to the lack of solidarity, the lack of cohesion.

These subjects were avoided. And yet we already have a shortfall of over a billion ECU in 1986. I do not have to be told that we are still in an electoral period. We know that there are going to be elections very shortly in one of the large Member States. But there are always going to be elections in the offing, until we have a united Europe. And there will be plenty more in the months and years ahead. So let us stop constantly putting off solutions. They will become progressively harder to find with the passage of time. Courage will always be needed, but the longer we wait the harder it will be to muster. I nevertheless believe that if the people of Europe, in their various countries, were told the truth, they would be more prepared to accept the compromises that have to be made.

The trouble is that everyone, at all levels, is trying to lie so as to shift all the responsibility onto others. {APPLAUSE}

To take the budget: we must have the courage to accept that it does not measure up to our aspirations, or alternatively we must abandon some of these aspirations. We cannot do everything we want to do with funding amounting to about 1%; of our countries' collective GDP. To say that we can is a lie, and deserves to be exposed as such.

We need to rediscover the spirit of Europe. The spirit of Europe was a spirit of solidarity, for that is what the cohesion that the President of the Commission was talking of comes down to. And there will be no building of Europe until such time as we manage to accommodate the concerns of all 12 countries in the Community, all of which have an investment in Europe's survival. Otherwise, we can only take a short-term view, trying to cope with the complex, difficult, dangerous world in which we live, to cope with the international challenges of terrorism, technology, population imbalances, the new scourge of AIDS, and drugs—I apologize for lumping all of these together, for although they are all serious problems, they are very difficult. If we fail to overcome them, if we fail to show not only lucidity and courage but solidarity as well, Europe will cease to exist as a living civilization, worthy of playing its role in the world.

The danger of internal disintegration and stagnation must be met by solidarity, which must find expression in a proper budget and closer union.

We must meet the external threat by having the courage to tackle our security problems, since what is the point of talking about solidarity in relation to the common agricultural policy or the various other problems that we discuss day after day when we are lacking in solidarity where our very existence, the security of each and every one of us, is concerned?

{APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
