{title} Remarks by the President And Other Participants in Democratic Leadership Forum, The Third Way: Progressive Governance for the 21st Century {/title}
{event} Democratic Leadership Forum, The Third Way: Progressive Governance for the 21st Century {/event}
{speaker} Tony Blair {/speaker}
{date} April 25, 1999 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} Remarks by President and NATO Leaders in DLC Roundtable {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you, Mr. President, and I think the first thing I would like to say is how delighted I am to take part in this event, and to thank Al From and the Democratic Leadership Council for having hosted it -- and I think, probably on behalf of all the leaders who attended this summit, to apologize to the people of Washington for the inconvenience that we've caused them. But it's just as well we're not running for election here, but -- {LAUGHTER}

I also want to say a word of thanks to the President as well. I believe what happened over these past few days will in time be seen as something quite historic. I think we have witnessed a little piece of history in these last few days. And I don't know about my other colleagues, but I found, when I was sitting round the table today with people from all sorts of different countries, who would have considered themselves in a different world, really, from us, a few years ago, there was something quite humbling about their desire to be part of our family -- about their tremendous innocence, in the best sense of the word, belief in the values of democracy and justice and freedom, and creating a better society and better world.

I think something happened this weekend that I think was remarkable, and it wouldn't have happened without the leadership and the vision of President Bill Clinton. And thank you for that. {APPLAUSE}

On the Third Way, itself -- and as Ger Schroeder was saying to me on the way in, look, I haven't found the first two ways yet, so you tell me where the third one is, but -- {LAUGHTER} -- on the Third Way, itself, I think we start from one simple proposition. And I find this when I talk to people in no matter what part of the world we're in, which is why this idea of dialogue I think is so important.

All countries have different ways of coping with these two basic problems -- how you get economic prosperity in a world of economic globalization and massive technological change, number one; and number two, when societies are changing, families are changing, lifestyles are changing, the whole way that the people live their life in our society is changing, and how you provide social stability in these times. I think those are the two things that confront us always, the whole time -- how do you provide prosperity in this world of economic change, how do you provide stability in this world of social change?

Now, the way that I define the Third Way is this, that what I would call, really, if I could use British or European terms, what I would call the old left would have almost tried to resist change, would just have said, we don't like this change. And we became associated with high taxes, producer interests, big government. In terms of crime, for example, we were often perceived as simply soft on crime, indifferent to it, more worried about the rights of those committing crimes than those people that were victims of it -- and, basically, didn't appear to have answers to these problems of the future. That was the old left.

The new right that was produced in a sense as a sort of counter-revolution to that, in the '80s, thought the solution to everything was just get rid of government, just get it out -- as little of it as possible, get rid of it all, economics of laissez faire and socially, often I think indifferent to what was actually breaking apart the bonds of society.

Now, I think that our whole process, really, for the center and center-left is a voyage of rediscovery. What is it that we're really, really about? And I believe what we're really, really about is the politics of community, summed up as Al From put it -- community, opportunity, responsibility.

And I think that, then, leads to four different parts from that, that derive from that basic principle. In other words, it's about reasserting ourselves as a party of values -- not as a party of fixed ideological or policy positions, but party values -- and then it's saying, well, how do you apply those values to these great economic and social changes.

I think there are four parts, as I say. I think, first of all, in economic terms, we define the new role for government. And the role for government is not old-style corporatism or heavy-handed intervention, it's essentially about government's role in promoting education, skills, technological advance, small businesses, entrepreneurship -- it's a role for government, but it's not the role that it used to be. And it's distinguishable, both from the old politics of heavy-handed intervention and some of the new right politics, which is laissez-faire.

In social terms, it's about the concept of a modern civic society. I'll tell you what my generation wants, I believe. We went through a period in the '60s where, if you like, people just sort of said, well, you do your own thing. I think want my generation and younger wants -- and I notice this with young people in my society, particularly today -- is they want a society that is free from prejudice, but not free from rules. So they want to make sure that the sexual and racial equality, that there isn't discrimination against people -- they don't actually believe that its tolerable that old ladies are beaten up by young thugs.

So and neither do they believe it's tolerable that someone simply takes money off the welfare state and feels no sense of responsibility toward the society in which they live. So I think it's also, then, secondly, about a civic society based on rights and duties.

Thirdly, if you do believe in active community, you have to redefine and reinvent government. And this is what this administration here and Vice President Gore have done an immense amount in really pioneering work on. But all of us in our different ways are trying to reinvent the institutions of government. You do things differently, different mechanisms -- sometimes you use the voluntary sector, there will be partnerships between public and private sector; decentralized government will be done in a different way than it was before.

And the fourth area -- which is why I think it's good in a way that we are having this seminar, even though the whole of this weekend has been overshadowed by Kosovo -- because I think the fourth principle that derives from our belief in community, opportunity, responsibility, is a belief that this applies internationally as well as nationally. And, therefore, when we say what is happening in Kosovo is utterly unacceptable and we are not going to tolerate it, we will stand up to the rights of oppressed people there, that is every bit as much about our values as it is about strategic interest.

And so, internationally, I think we are people that are outward, not isolationists. And what I noticed with a lot of the talk on parts of the right in my country and other countries, is they increasingly retreat into a sense of national interest that I believe ultimately is contrary to national interest, because it seeks to shut nations off from each other in the world at large.

So I think, derived from a rediscovery of our essential values -- the belief in community, opportunity and responsibility as being the basis for that -- a derivation from those values in the economic, the social, the government, and the international sphere, adds up to practical policies in the end. It's an agenda of values and principles that ends up with practical policies that make a different to the people whose lives we're looking after, and trying to help.

And a couple of other things, by way of finishing. The first is that I think it's really important in this that we understand that the people at the table are all in government. I mean, Bill, and Massimo and Ger and I have been in government a little bit shorter, I should say, but for Wim and Bill -- all of us, we've been doing these things. I mean, there's actually policy content to this. And the policy content is driven by these ideas and values, and that is very, very important. Because in the end what is important also is to give a sense of vision in which the values, the principles, and the policies form one seamless line.

And the other final comment is this: It is very important, in my view, for this whole project of renewal to be a dynamic project. Our center is a dynamic center. It's not a soggy center. It's not just the lowest common denominator between left and right. It is a genuine attempt to address the problems of the future according to the principles of justice. And I truly believe that it offers a new, different, radical and better way forward for politics in the 21st century. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
