{title} Speech to European Parliament {/title}
{event} European Parliament, Strasbourg {/event}
{speaker} Thomas Megahy {/speaker}
{date} December 9, 1986 {/date}
{source} http://www.margaretthatcher.org/speeches/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech} 

Mr President, the prize for the most fatuous political statement of the week must go to Mrs Thatcher for her description of the European Summit as ‘demonstrating the relevance of the Community to ordinary people in Europe'. Far from it! What it really demonstrated was the total irrelevance of the European Council's meeting to the solution of the most urgent and pressing problems currently facing the Community, its Member States and their citizens.

The agenda of this meeting was deliberately designed by Mrs Thatcher to avoid any real discussion of the twin crises of mounting food surpluses and impending bankruptcy. Once again it represented a complete refusal to address the real issues under the Community's control, a classic case of fiddling while Rome burns and a philosophy of never do today what you can put off till tomorrow. But, of course, tomorrow may be too late because unless drastic action is taken now, by the time the Heads of Government meet again next March, the Community may well be bankrupt. We have a saying for this in Yorkshire and I would see this as being particularly appropriate. This, Mr President, was a Summit about nowt, absolutely nowt.

Let's do what the leaders of the 12 nations are refusing to do. Let's face up to the facts. The Community's food mountains are now so large that they cannot even be dumped at subsidized prices on the world market because there is not enough money to make this possible. This week we debate the second reading of the budget. We know that the soaring costs of farm policy will create a crisis next year and that the British President's so-called creative accountancy has merely delayed the evil day. Realistically we face a deficit of about 4 billion ECU in the budget.

In the face of all this concern, how do the Heads of Government demonstrate their concern over the urgency of the situation? Is it top of the agenda? Are they complaining that in the face of this crisis other issues less important but deserving of attention are pushed off the list of topics for discussion? On the contrary. As you well know, the most important and urgent topic facing the Community was dealt with over aperitifs, half-an-hour given to President Delors before dinner. Jacques Delors, the President of the European Commission, was treated as Mrs Thatcher might treat some troublesome petitioner, addressed in the contemptuous and patronizing tones to which he is perhaps less accustomed than we are in Britain. In seven years we have grown accustomed to our Prime Minister's disdain for all those who do not jump at her command. That includes, of course, most of the members of her own cabinet. {AUDIENCE} Rubbish! {/AUDIENCE} 

Mrs Thatcher likes, or so she says, to run her government like a business. What should we think of a managing director who relegated discussion of the firm's impending bankruptcy to gin and tonics before the board meeting? What we should have got was strong decisive leadership—a message from the Heads of State to the Agriculture and Budget Ministers that they must agree to act now on the fundamental reforms that are absolutely necessary in this Community. If the European Council cannot do that, if the Summit meeting won't address itself to that, then what possible use is this institution? Is it merely a club where people get together to exchange pleasantries and to ignore the real decisions that need to be made in the Community?

Now, this is not to deny the importance of the subjects discussed. Of these, the one which stands out is the persistent and increasing problem of unemployment. The number of registered unemployed in the Community is approaching 16 million. What is more, if other governments are as adept as the British Tories fiddling the figures, then the true figure must be even higher.

What is needed quite plainly is a concerted plan of public spending to boost employment. There is a huge backlog of public investment projects all over the EEC, and we need to get the governments throughout the Community to make a major effort in public spending to increase demand and to get the jobless back to work. But, of course, the solution that is coming from Mrs Thatcher's government is the attempt to foist on the Community the same disastrous free-market policies which have led to a quadrupling of unemployment in the United Kingdom, coupled only with the ideas of so-called flexibility and the erosion of rights of employees—ideas, incidentally, entirely alien to the Commission's own approach comprehensively rejected by the European Parliament itself at its November plenary, and evincing responses ranging from the outright hostility of the trade union movement throughout Europe to the indifference of most other Member State governments.

Reports that Mrs Thatcher would want support for this strategy are belied by the insistence of other Member State governments that workers' organizations should be involved in making decisions which affect the vital interests of their members. This, as we know in Britain only too well, is actively at odds with the Thatcherite approach. The British Government during the whole of the time it has had the Presidency of the Council of Ministers has consistently blocked any attempt at progressive social legislation. I might say in particular that though Mrs Thatcher is the only woman amongst the Heads of Government, her government has been particularly active in blocking any attempt to increase the rights of women and to increase progressive legislation in that respect.

Of course, it was not the issue of unemployment which dominated the agenda. The major subjects of discussion were terrorism, drugs and the dangers of illegal immigration, with AIDS thrown in for good measure. All these are important subjects. Terrorism certainly is a menace and I welcome the programme to combat it. I would have liked to see some mention of State terrorism as practised by certain States, in particular some mention of the actions of the United States Government in illegally selling arms to Iran and then funnelling the money to State terrorists who are fighting against the Nicaraguan Government. That was absent from this particular proposal. {APPLAUSE} 

But of course these issues were not chosen for the gravity of the problems involved. Nor were they selected because they were particularly amenable to a concerted Community response. In each case, of course, whilst a Community response is necessary, it can only mitigate the problem, never provide a complete solution. They were chosen instead so that specious harmony might prevail in order that the electoral prospects of Chancellor Kohl and of Mrs Thatcher herself mightn't suffer from any discord, and in order finally that our British Prime Minister might, as one Tory Sunday newspaper claimed, establish herself as the so-called model leader of Europe.

Now the nature of this so-called model leadership is starkly revealed by the treatment of the chosen issues. The threat of illegal immigration as opposed to the growing threat of intimidation, violence and institutionalized racism suffered daily by members of ethnic minorities did not get a mention.

We heard pious expressions of concern over the threat of AIDS from a Head of Government which has actually cut funds available for research, and in fact has spent something like 5 times as much trying to sell off nationalized industries to the public as it is now spending on AIDS. I have no doubt that concern about drugs is justified but not from a Prime Minister whose policies have plunged hundreds of thousands of young people into lives of emptiness and despair. {APPLAUSE} 

Her response to terrorism dismisses as fellow travellers those who express concern over civil rights and liberties.

It has been my misfortune here to have sat through two address by Mr Thatcher in her position as President-in-Office of the Council. I remember on the last occasion taking part in a demonstration in which we used the slogan ‘2 million unemployed'. It is a measure of the way this Community is going now that if I were to do that and talk about unemployment in my own country, I'd be talking about 4 million unemployed. That is what the threat of Thatcherism means, and I am only too glad that the British people will take the opportunity at the next election to make sure that I and the other Members will not have to sit through a third session of Mrs Thatcher reporting as the President of the Council. Then perhaps we will not only get rid of Mrs Thatcher herself, but also of those pernicious policies and stop them spreading to the whole of Europe.

{APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
