{title} Presidents Bush, Fox Conclude State Visit {/title}
{event} State Visit, Savage Hall, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio {/event}
{speaker} Vicente Fox {/speaker}
{date} September 6, 2001 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}
{description} ----- {/description}

{speech}

My friend, George Bush, is making things very tough for me. He's a great friend of Mexico. He's a great friend to Mexicans in the United States. He is a great friend for truth, work, commitment and the passion for the art of government. {APPLAUSE}

Each day, I gain more and more respect for his leadership, for his vision, for his hard work. Each day, I gain a better understanding between us, and there is more agreement between us. And for that reason, I daily thank him for his friendship and for this friend who works for his people. {APPLAUSE}

Ladies and gentlemen, dear friends, I can feel right here the enthusiasm, the warm welcome, which you generously are giving to us. Your welcome has moved me, and I'm convinced once again that no matter where fate may lead us, we Mexican men and women continue, united, through bonds that are extremely strong. {APPLAUSE}

It is a great pleasure to be here in this university, accompanied by President George Bush, Governor Taft, who have honored Mexico in having me come up as first foreign head of a state to visit the United States during this administration. And I also wish to thank for the invitation to come to Ohio, because I feel among friends -- me siento entre amigos. {APPLAUSE}

I had the privilege of dialoguing and speaking with President Bush in the last 24 hours, and this morning I had the honor to address the United States Congress. In both, I have exposed our firm conviction that trust shall be the foundation of our relationship; that trust will be the cornerstone of increasing the relationship between the United States and Mexico; and that, based on trust, we can work better for solving with efficiency, with talent, our mutual challenges that we face on this 21st century. {APPLAUSE}

Today, I want to tell you that in Mexico, we do not ever forget our beloved countrymen. Not only do we not forget them, but we also recognize with pride that we have learned so much from you -- from your courage, your determination, your perseverance and your valor. And I want to tell you not only that we love you and respect you, that we need you back in Mexico, that we will be working to welcome all of you back in Mexico to promote the growth about a great nation and to work together to construct a better future for our country. {APPLAUSE}

I know of the trying experiences that have been of our beloved countrymen and women, and I have heard exemplary stories of men and women who inspire us deeply. And we are proud of them.

We are going to visit the Aurora Gonzales Community Center, which will allow us to know more about the life of an untiring defender of community solidarity here in Toledo. We've also heard of the work of so many other members of this community who, with great generosity, find time to help those who need support, guidance, or simply a word of encouragement.

How many stories could be told of the lives of so many Mexican men and women who, one day, decided to leave their country, to come here seeking new opportunities in this great nation. How many stories of hard work and of sacrifice. One of these is the story of Rosario Marin, an exemplary Mexican who came to this nation at the age of 14 and who recently was appointed Treasurer of the United States of America. {APPLAUSE} We are proud of her efforts and her success, as well as we are proud of all Mexican women that work day by day in this country, and that contribute to its greatness and to its success. {APPLAUSE}

This land of opportunity, the United States, has always kept its door open to countless immigrants from all over the world, remaining true to its founding principles. Let me quote President Bush's remarks, who recently said that "the United States has traditionally been a welcoming society, where immigration is not a problem to be solved, but a sign of our confident and successful nation. History supports that assertion, because more importantly, we see the proof of that in the innumerable contributions that migrants have made over the last two centuries to the rich and varied American culture." {APPLAUSE}

Today, we're not only neighbors, we're not only friends, we are partners through the commitment we signed with NAFTA. We are partners to work together, building a better future for both of our nations. NAFTA has been successful. It has created jobs in Mexico. It has created jobs in the United States. {APPLAUSE}

Today, as a consequence of NAFTA, the trade balance between the United States and Mexico, as was mentioned by President Bush, has reached $250 billion U.S. But the most important part of it is that we buy and sell, and that today, Mexico is buying products and services from the United States more than France, Italy, Spain, and Germany are doing together. That is being partners. {APPLAUSE} That is creating jobs.

It is a time for commitment and hard work. Let us not pass lightly over the countless sorrows and exemplary efforts of so many men and women that we call migrants. We must find the resolve, the necessary act, and act quickly so that we can find shared solutions to these common problems.

We have had two great days here in the United States. We are honored and we are totally satisfied with the conversations we have had, with the decisions we have taken. No doubt that, together, we're building a better future for both of our nations. {APPLAUSE}

In the field of migration, or in drug trafficking and combatting organized crime, where we have been rendering extraordinary results, we have extradited criminals that the U.S. justice has been after more than whatever was done in past years.

With this trust and cooperation, we are gaining the battle against organized crime and drugs, and same, as well, we've done on the subject of economic development on building of opportunities. Mexico today, on the border states and the border cities, has unemployment rates of one percent. And we want to make that true and happen on the center and the south of Mexico. {APPLAUSE}

We know and understand very well our commitment, our obligations, which are to make sure that every family, that every person within Mexico, has the opportunity of a decent job with income that is enough for living with dignity; that it is our obligation to make sure that every single kid and young person in Mexico has the opportunity to go to intermediate school or to university. This is why we have created a scholarship system through which every single kid in Mexico has the guarantee to comply with his personal project of education. Up to university level he has the guarantee of that scholarship if his problem is the lack of enough economic resources. {APPLAUSE}

Every kid that takes this opportunity of going to school and university in Mexico, certainly will stay there with his family. It will not become a migrant.

So, dear friends, amigas y amigos, we face a challenge that may seem formidable. But so is our determination to overcome our differences and reach common ground and attain a common purpose. This is a unique time in our history. I feel privileged to belong to this age and to be able to play an active role in building a new partnership between Mexico and the United States. {APPLAUSE} We are at the dawn of a new century, full of possibilities and new horizons. This can be the century of the major accomplishments for our two nations. This 21st century is the century of the Americas, and, of course, the century of North America. And we know -- and I want to address -- Mexican communities in the United States will have our support.

I came here to Toledo, Ohio, first because I had this invitation from President Bush, but also because I wanted to meet with our own people. And I wanted to tell my paisanos in this part of the United States that my friend, President Bush, and myself will work not only for your cause, but also for the cause of the United States and the cause of Mexico. {APPLAUSE}

I return home very motivated for the way we have been received, for the way we have been listened, and for the much accomplishments -- the many accomplishments that we have had in these few hours that we have been here in the United States. More than ever, we have the conviction that working together, having trust of our philosophy, there is no limit to what we can do. And that is well-expressed here in the United States.

This, the largest economy in the world, this, the most powerful nation, has been able to reach its high objectives because of the work, because of the passion, because of the intense sacrifice that many, many millions of people do every day to make this nation great and big.

For us in Mexico, today we know that we have friends, that we have a partner, and that we have a better future for us and for our people.

Thank you very much to all of you, and God bless you. {APPLAUSE}

{/speech}
