{title} Remarks by the President And Other Participants in Democratic Leadership Forum, The Third Way: Progressive Governance for the 21st Century {/title}
{event} Democratic Leadership Forum, The Third Way: Progressive Governance for the 21st Century {/event}
{speaker} Wim Kok {/speaker}
{date} April 25, 1999 {/date}
{source} http://www.clintonfoundation.org/ {/source}
{description} Remarks by President and NATO Leaders in DLC Roundtable {/description}

{speech} 

Thank you. Allow me, please, to join first Tony when he made his comments on this, this weekend, this NATO summit. The summit was, of course, overshadowed by what is still happening in Kosovo. And I think the outcome of the summit is encouraging, in terms of unity -- and not in an unnatural way -- unity between the member states of NATO, in spite of the fact that there are, of course, nuances, because I very much understand the specific position where, for example, Italy and Greece are located so closely to Serbia and to Kosovo -- that makes a difference. But there's unity.

And on top of that, we have that very, very remarkable experience of having such a large family of 19 members and 23 other countries together around one and the same table. And that shows that in the new century, NATO will be as necessary as before, but will be a different, new NATO, based on the same values -- rule of law, justice, against crime, against inhumanity. We will do it in another way, in accordance with the new situation. And I'm most happy that we're under your leadership here.

Having said that, I come to the item of today -- as you said yourself, Bill, we put it into practice without having the label on it, the Third Way. Sometimes I have the impression that the Third Way is a very broad Third Avenue, but -- {LAUGHTER} -- anyhow, it is symbolic for renewal.

And I like the approach very much, because -- well, I am Prime Minister of a relatively small European country, only 16 million people. An open economy, very dependent on international trade, a high share of our national income is exported and imported. So we became perhaps earlier aware of the necessity to change and to adapt some other larger economies in Europe and outside Europe. And I'm proud to be a citizen of a country where we have a very high social standard.

I think we belong together with the Scandinavian countries, to the countries who have the highest level of social benefits, which is good, but, if you are not very careful, dangerous at the same time. Because in these modern times, people do not just -- must have the right to be protected if they need to be protected, in terms of social standards, of social care; but people also must feel the urgency of responsibility. Opportunities is one thing, responsibility is the other thing. And solidarity, in fact, has two aspects. People who cannot take care of themselves must be protected in a decent way.

But the taxpayer -- that's also the average worker and worker family -- must know that what he or she is paid is dealt with in an appropriate way, by those who get the money. So, participation and responsibility is as important as solidarity. We have -- solidarity is a two-way Third Way -- a two-way road. {LAUGHTER}

So what we did, what we had to do is renewing the social system, not by breaking down these walls of social standards, but by activating social security policies, bringing people from welfare to work, and making people responsible for their own decisions, and also being, in community terms, being straight-forward. Because you have rights, but also responsibilities.

I'm like Tony Blair, very much in favor of taking change as reality, because we are living in a world -- an interdependent world, where change is a must. New technologies are not only a danger for some people, but offer opportunities and possibilities, and these can be translated into new possibilities.

What that means to the government must be an empowering government offering the tools to people on the basis of equal opportunities to make the best out of their life. But then we must be very keen, of course -- when we use the word community, we must know that there are not only winners, that too many people also in my country -- and it will not be different in other European countries or here in the United States -- who will never be the winners because of technological change. Where empowerment and where the modern possibilities of training and education are not possible anymore.

So we have only a community if the winners feel responsible for the losers and make -- give the best possible opportunities for those who cannot afford to follow the rhythm and the speed of technological change to have a good living. And this is true for the national case. It is also true for the international case.

We have, again, in the international world, of course, to stress what we have to do in terms of giving help and showing solidarity with the poorer countries. But they must also be in the possibility to do so. So that relief for the countries in the most miserable financial situation -- in African countries, for example, is a must. If we don't do so, give them the possibility to get rid of their debts, because they pay more money on interest rates because of the debt than they even earn, then the spiral is going all the time deeper and deeper. That's also community and that is done in my approach also, part of our approach.

And my final word is, let's not forget the ecological aspect of what we are doing, because the quality of our lives, and the quality of our future, will be based not only on the basis of material progress -- on profits, or salaries, or whatsoever -- we want to have a world for our children and our grandchildren that is really worthwhile. And that means that we must be prepared, in our own economies and altogether -- and quite often it can be better done in the international field than just nationally -- to pursue policies that are not always popular, but are necessary to prepare a better world for the next generation.

Thank you. {APPLAUSE} 

{/speech}
