{title} Ten Commandments rally in Alabama {/title} 
{event} ----- {/event} 
{speaker} Roy Moore {/speaker} 
{date} August 16, 2003 {/date} 
{source} http://www.renewamerica.us {/source} 
 
{description} ----- {/description} 
 
{speech} 
 
Thank you. Thank you very much. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE}

With so much security around it's much better. First I'd like to begin by thanking Dr. Rick Scarborough and the Vision Forum Ministries for the outstanding work they've done in organizing this rally. You all give them a big hand. {APPLAUSE}

But even more importantly, they've been working to organize pastors across this nation to understand the real issues of our day and time, and they deserve the attention and recognition you can give them, and the support of all the people of this country. I'd like to also thank my good friend and the director of the Foundation for Moral Law in Birmingham, Dr. Mel Glenn, who's responsible and has been for the raising of attorney fees in my defense. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE}

Dr. Mel Glenn has done an outstanding job and I appreciate him very much, and it's very important because at this time we have a lot of attorney fees. I want to thank the speakers and the singers and everyone who has participated in this, especially the men who have devoted their time and come from great distances, like Dr. Alan Keyes, my good friend, Dr. Mark White, Dr. Jerry Falwell, Howard Phillips and Sandy Rios. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE}

I don't believe that he's been recognized, but I have a friend from New York City, Rabbi Yehuda Levin -- Laven -- Levin. I'll say it right in a minute. {APPLAUSE} Rabbi Levin represents over 1,000 rabbis who support, and understandably so, the Ten Commandments of God. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE}

But my greatest appreciation belongs to you, the people that have left their homes and their schools and their businesses to come down here to Montgomery, Alabama to stand up for their inalienable rights to acknowledge God. That is the issue. It's not about me. I will pass away, as every politician and every pastor will, but the laws of God will remain forever. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE}

It's not about politics, it's not about religion. You know I've heard so many in political fields will not participate because it's about religion. And I hear of pastors that won't participate because it's about politics. Let's get it straight, it's about one thing, it's about the acknowledgment of the God upon which this nation and our laws are founded. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE}

Those aren't my words. Those are the words that Judge Myron Thompson in this case when he said, and I quote, "The issue is, can the state acknowledge God?" He said, "No." If this ruling is allowed to stand, it will reverberate from state to state to state, to the nation's capital. And the acknowledgment of God will be taken from us. If we sit quietly by while this unalienable right is taken, even the rocks and the trees and the stones that you see would cry out for judgment. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE}

If I should fail to do my duty in this case, for fear of giving offense, I would consider myself guilty of treason toward my country, and of an act of disloyalty toward the majesty of heaven which I revere above all earthy kings. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE}

Years ago, I expressed my sentiments in a poem that I wrote entitled "Our American Birthright":

"One nation under God was their cry, indeed their declaration. Upon the laws of nature's God, they built a mighty nation. But unlike mankind before them who had walked this earthen sod, these men would never question the sovereignty of God. That all men were created was a truth self-evident, and to secure the rights that God gave us was the role of government. And should any form of government become destructive of this end, it was their right, indeed their duty, a new one to begin.

"So with a firm reliance on divine providence for protection, they pledged their sacred honor and they sought His wise direction. They lifted up an appeal to God for all the world to see, and vowed their independence forever to be free. But I'm glad they're not here with us to see the mess we're in, how we've given up our righteousness for a life of indulgent sin. For when abortion is no longer called murder, when sodomy is deemed a right, then good is now called evil and darkness is now called light.

"And no longer do we need a God when man is in control, for the only truth self-evident is in the latest poll. But with man as his own master, we fail to count the cost, our precious freedoms vanish and our liberties are lost. Our children are told they can't pray in school and they teach them evolution. Why can't they see the fear of God is the only true solution.

"Our schools have become the battleground while all across the land, Christians just shrug their shoulders, afraid to take a stand. And from the grave you can hear their voices cry the victory's already been won. Just glorify the Father, as did His only Son. And when your work on this earth is done and when you've traveled where they trod, you'll leave the land that was left to you, one nation under God." {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE}

In the words of Lincoln, "We have been the recipient of the choicest bounties of Heaven. We have been preserved these many years in peace and prosperity. We have grown in numbers, wealth and power as no other nation has ever grown, but we have forgotten God. We have forgotten the gracious hand which preserved us in peace and multiplied, enriched and strengthened us. And we have vainly imagined in the deceitfulness of our own hearts that all of these blessings were produced by some superior wisdom in virtue of our own. Intoxicated with unbroken success, we have become too self-sufficient to feel the necessity for redeeming and preserving grace, too proud to pray to the God who made us."

You know, men of valor and women of valor have died through the centuries preserving this unalienable right. We are fighting all over this globe to preserve liberty for others. But many people don't understand that we're fighting a battle here. And every one of you, no matter how young, no matter how old, male, female are engaged in this battle. You're a soldier if you don't know it, but most people don't know what that battle's about. It's a spiritual warfare.

You see, "Today we face another war, fought not upon some distant shore, nor against a foe that you can see, but one as ruthless as can be. He'll take your life and your children too. He'll say there's nothing you can do. He'll make you think that wrong is right, 'tis but a sign to stand and fight. For when we face the wrath of Hell, against those gates we shall prevail. In homes and schools across our land, it's time for Christians to take a stand. {CHEERS ; APPLAUSE}

"And when your work on this earth is done, when the battle is over and the victory is won, when through all the earth His praise will ring and all the heavenly angels sing, 'twill be enough just to see the Son and hear Him say, 'My child, well done.' You kept my faith strong and true. I knew that I could count on you."

Thank you. 
 
{/speech} 
