{title} Speech at British Embassy dinner {/title}
{event} ----- {/event} 
{speaker} Ronald Reagan {/speaker}
{date} Febrary 27, 1981 {/date}
{source} www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/ {/source}

{description} ----- {/description}

{speech}
 
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, Vice President, Prime Minister Bob Hope will know what I mean when I speak in the language of my previous occupation and say you are a hard act to follow. {LAUGHTER ; APPLAUSE} 

Nancy and I want to thank you for the warmth of those words that you spoke as well as your gracious hospitality. And may I say that I do know something about that "two o'clock courage," but I also know that you have already shown that two o'clock courage on too many occasions to name. {APPLAUSE} 

It's been delightful for Nancy and me to be here and with the Thatcher family in these 48 hours and to know them better, to know Mr. Thatcher, to know your daughter Carol. I would also like to think Sir Nicholas and Lady Henderson who have made this house such a gracious center of hospitality in this city. 

Winston Churchill is believed to have said that the three most difficult things a man can be asked to do is to climb a wall leaning toward him, kiss a woman leaning away from him, and give a good after dinner speech. {LAUGHTER} This evening marks the first steps I've taken as a President on foreign soil. {LAUGHTER} What an honor to visit Great Britain first and how symbolic of the close relationship between our two nations that I only had to go fifteen city blocks to do it. {LAUGHTER} I wonder if this is what is meant by the saying that the sun never sets on the British Empire. {LAUGHTER} I do hope you agree, Prime Minister, that this city is an excellent vantage point from which to see the brilliant sunlight that still falls upon the Empire. I don't mean the empire of territorial possessions. I mean the empire of civilized ideas, the rights of man under God, the rule of law, constitutional government, parliamentary democracy, all the great notions of human liberty still so ardently sought by so many and so much of mankind. 

These are the enduring grandeur of the British heritage and you know, Prime Minister, that we have a habit of quoting Winston Churchill. Tell me, is it possible to get through a public address today in Britain without making reference to him? It is increasingly difficult to do so here, not just because we Americans share some pride in his ancestry, but because there's so much to learn from him, his fearlessness, and I don't just mean physical courage. I mean he was, for instance, unafraid to laugh. I can remember words attributed to Churchill about one somber, straight-laced colleague in Parliament. Churchill said, "He has all the virtues I dislike and none of the vices I admire." {LAUGHTER} 

He once said of one of our best-known diplomats that he was the only case he knew of a bull who carries his own china closet with him. {LAUGHTER} 

The gift of humor can make a people see what they might ordinarily overlook and it supplements that other gift of great leaders, vision. When he addressed Parliament in the darkest moments after Dunkirk, Churchill dared to promise the British their finest hour and even reminded them that they would someday enjoy, quote, "the bright, sunlit uplands," unquote, from which the struggle against Hitler would be seen as only a bad memory. Well, Madam Prime Minister, you and I have heard our share of somber assessments and dire predictions in recent months. I do not refer here to the painful business of ending our economic difficulties. We know that with regard to the economies of both our countries we will be home safe and soon enough. 

I do refer, however, to those adversaries who preach the supremacy of the state. We've all heard the slogans, the end of the class struggle, the vanguard of the proletariat, the wave of the future, the inevitable triumph of socialism. Indeed, if there's anything the Marxist-Leninists might not be forgiven for it is their willingness to bog the world down in tiresome cliches, cliches that rapidly are being recognized for what they are, a gaggle of bogus prophecies and petty superstitions. Prime Minister, everywhere one looks these days the cult of the state is dying, and I wonder if you and I and other leaders of the West should not now be looking toward bright, sunlit uplands and begin planning for a world where our adversaries are remember-d only for their role in a sad and rather bizarre chapter in human history. 

The British people, who nourish the great civilized ideas, know the forces of good ultimately rally and triumph over evil. That, after all, is the legend of the Knights of the Round Table, the legend of the man who lived on Baker Street, the story of London in the Blitz, the meaning of the Union Jack snapping briskly in the wind. Madam Prime Minister, I'll make one further prediction, that the British people are once again about to pay homage to their beloved Sir Winston by doing him the honor of proving him wrong and showing the world that their finest hour is yet to come, and how he would have loved the irony of that. How proud it would have made him. 

So, ladies and gentlemen, I ask you to join me in a toast to the memory of that great leader of free people, to his vision of bright, sunlit uplands, a toast to his Britannia and all that she's been, all that she is, and all that she will be, and to her finest hour, yet to come. Ladies and gentlemen, to Her Majesty, the Queen. The Queen. 

{/speech}
